+++
title = "01"

+++


*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 1:   
Maitreyah -   
Bhagavan samyak aakhyaatam mama etat akhilam tvayaa |   
Jagatah sarga sambandhi yat prushto asi guro mayaa || ****Maitreya *- O *Paraasharar*, I asked you about the creation of this world. You told me everything I asked you. ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha dviteeye amshe srushti visheshah tat prasangaat srushtaanaam nivaasah   
cha uchyate | Tatra prathame amshe avasheshitam priyavrata anvayam   
prucchati bhagavan iti | Sarga sambandhi srushti anubandham vastu, yathaa   


jagat babhoova yat mayam ityaadikam | ***Now the creation - where all they were residing, and where they were ruling, is going to be told. What was not told about *Priyavrata Vamsha*, is going to be told here. Related to creation, how did creation happen, how they are all related, everything is told as *Vishnu's vibhooti, vapu * only, is going to be told. This is continuing here. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 2:   
Yo ayam amsho jagat srushti sambandho gaditah tvayaa |   
Tatra aham shrotum icchaami bhooyo api munisattama ||*** You told me everything related to creation, about *Bhagavaan's vibhooti*. I want to listen more about that. ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yo ayam iti | Srushti sambandhah srushtyaa vaachakatvena sambandhah |   
Srushti vaachee hi prathama amshah |   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 3:   
Priyavrato uttaanapaadou sutou svaayambhuvasya you |   
Tayoh uttaanapaadasya dhruvah putrah tvayaa uditah ||*** You said that *Svaayambhuva Manu * had two children, *Priyavrata * and *Uttaanapaada. *Page **1** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** **SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***Uttaanapaada's * son *Dhruva*, his story was told in detail by you. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 4:   
Priyavratasya na eva uktaa bhavataa dvija santatih |   
Taam aham shrotum icchaami prasanno vaktum arhasi ||*** *Priyavrata's * progeny was not told by you. Be pleased and do tell me about *Priyavrata's **santaana*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 5:   
Sri Paraasharah -   
Kardamasya aatmajaam kanyaam upayeme priyavratah |   
Saamraat kukshischa tat kanye dasha putraah tathaa apare ||*** *Sri Paraasharar - Priyavrata * married the daughter of *Kardama Prajaapati. **Priyavrata * had two daughters - *Samraat * and *Kukshi*, and had ten sons. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 6:   
Mahaa praajnyaa mahaa veeryaa vineetaah dayitaah pituh |   
Priyavrata sutaah khyaataah teshaam naamaani me shrunu || ***They were all very wise and very valiant, very obedient. They are very well known as *Priyavrata's * sons. I will tell you their names. Listen to me. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 7:   
Agneedhrah cha agnibaahuh cha vapushmaan dyutimaan tathaa |   
Medhaa medhaatithih bhavyah savanah putra eva cha ||*** *Agneedhra, Agnibaahu, Vapushmaan, Dyutimaan, Medhaa, Medhaatithi, Bhavya, **Savana, Putra, ... * 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Agneedhrah iti | Navamasya putra iti samjnyaa | ***The name of the ninth son is *Putra*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 8:   
Jyotishmaan dashamah teshaam satya naamaa suto abhavat |   
Priyavratasya putraah te prakhyaataa bala veeryatah || ***... *Jyotishmaan * are the ten sons. *Jyotishmaan * is the tenth son. *Jyotishmaan's * name became *anvartha*. All these sons of *Priyavrata * were very famous and known for their valiance. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Jyotishmaan iti | Dashamo jyotishmaan, satya naamaa yathaartha naamaa,   
jyotishmattvaat | ****Jyotishmaan * had *brahma tejas*, shining forth with knowledge and *aatma gunaas*. He was true to his name. Page **2** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 9:   
Medhaagnirbaahu putraah tu trayo yoga paraayinaah |   
Jaatismaraa mahaabhaagaa na raajyaaya mano dadhuh ||*** Three of his sons - *Medhaa, Agnibaahu, Putra*, were always engaged in meditation. They remembered their previous births, they were *jaatismaraas*, they were great people, never interested in ruling the kingdom. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 10:   
Nirmamaah sarva kaalam tu samasta artheshu vai mune |   
Chakruh kriyaam yathaa nyaayam aphalaakaankshino hi te || ***They had no *mamakaara*, not attached to anything all the time. Like *karma yoga*, without expecting any fruits, they were engaged in all *karmaas*, as ordained. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 11:   
Priyavrato dadou teshaam saptaanaam munisattama |   
Sapta dveepaani maitreya vibhajya sumahaatmanaam ||*** *Priyavrata*, for the remaining seven sons, gave all his kingdom by dividing into seven parts. He gave nine islands, by dividing among them. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 12:   
Jamboodveepam mahaabhaaga so agneedhraaya dadou pitaa |   
Medhaatitheh tathaa praadaat plaksha dveepam tathaa aparam || ***For *Agnidhra*, he gave *Jamboodveepa*. For *Medhaatithi*, he gave *Plakshadveepa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 13:   
Shaalmale cha vapushmantam narendram abhishiktavaan |   
Jyotishmantam kushadveepe raajaanam krutavaan prabhuh ||*** *Vapushmaan * became king of *Shaalmaladveepa*. In *Kushadveepa*, he made *Jyotishmaan * as the king. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 14:   
Dyutimantam cha raajaanam krounchadveepe samaadishat |   
Shaakadveepe eeshvaram cha api bhavyam chakre priyavratah ||*** *Dyutimaan * became king of *Krounchadveepa*. He made *Bhavya * as king of *Shaakadveepa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 15:   
Pushkara adhipatim chakre savanam cha api sa prabhuh |   
Jamboodveepeshvaro yah tu agneedhro munisattama ||*** *Savana * became king of *Pushkara*. For *Jamboodveepa, Agneedhra * became king. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 16: ***Page **3** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Tasya putraah babhoovuh te prajaapati samaa nava |   
Naabhih kimpurushah cha eva harivarsha ilaavrutah || ****Agneedhra*, who was king of *Jamboodveepa*, had nine children, who were all like *Prajaapatis. Naabhi, Kimpurusha, Harivarsha, Ilaavruta*, ... 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tasya iti | Prajaapati samaah bhrugu aadi nava prajaapatibhih tulyaah | ***They were equivalent to *Bhrugu * and all the other *Prajaapatis * told earlier, in terms of their capabilities and knowledge. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 17:   
Ramyo hiranvaan shashtah cha kuruh bhadraashva eva cha |   
Ketumaalah tathaa eva anyah saadhucheshto abhavat nrupah ||*** *Ramya, Hiranvaan, Kuru, Bhadraashva, Ketumaala*, are the nine children. *Ketumaala * was a very virtuous and wise person. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 18:   
Jamboodveepa vibhaagaan cha teshaam vipra nishaamaya |   
Pitraa dattam himaahvam tu varsham naabheh tu dakshinam ||*** *Agneedhra * divided his kingdom *Jamboodveepa * among his nine children. *Himaahva **varsha * was given to *Naabhi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Jamboodveepa iti | Himaahvam bhaaratam dakshinam himavatah himavat   
hemakoota nishadhaih giribhih svasmaat svasmaat dakshinaanaam neela shveta   
shrungibhih uttareshaam varshaanaam etat vyapadeshah |*** *Himaahva * is *Bhaarata desha*. The locations of the kingdoms is being told - some of them are to the south of the other, and some to the north of the other. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 19:   
Hemakootam tathaa varsham dadou kimpurushaaya sah |   
Triteeyam naishadham varsham harivarshaaya dattavaan || ***For *Kimpurusha*, he gave *Hemakoota varsha*. For *Harivarsha*, he gave *Naishadavarsha, * this is the third one. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 20:   
Ilaavruttaaya pradadou meruh yatra tu madhyamah |   
Neelaachala aashritam varsham ramyaaya pradadou pitaa ||*** For *Ilaavruta*, he gave *Meru*, which is in the centre. For *Ramya*, he gave *Neelaachalavarsha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 21:   
Shvetam yat uttaram tasmaat pitraa dattam hiranvate ||*** Page **4** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **For *Hiranvaan*, he gave *Shvetavarsha*, which is to the north of *Neelaachala*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 22:   
Yat uttaram shrungavato varsham tat kurave dadou |   
Meroh poorvena yat varsham bhadraashvaaya pradattavaan ||*** For *Kuru*, he gave *Shrungavarsha*, which is again to the north of that. He gave the *varsha * to the east of *Meru * to *Bhadraashva*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yat iti | Gandhamaadhanavarsham meroh paschimam |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 23:   
Gandhamaadhanavarsham tu ketumaalaaya dattavaan |   
Iti etaani dadou tebhyah putrebhyah sa nareshvarah || ***For *Ketumaala*, he gave *Gandhamaadhanavarsha*. He gave all these to his sons like this. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 24:   
Varsheshu eteshu taan putraan abhishichya sa bhoomipah |   
Saalagraamam mahaa punyam maitreya tapase yayou || ***He made *Jamboodveepa * into nine divisions. He gave them to his nine sons. He went to *Saalagraama*, which is a very auspicious place, to do tapas there. 



Earth is delimited by mountains. *Varsha * is an expanse of earth, like a kingdom, surrounded by mountains. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 25:   
Yaani kimpurusha aadeeni varshaani ashtou mahaamune |   
Teshaam svaabhaavikee siddhih sukha praayaa hi ayatanatah || ***From *Kimpurusha * the eight *varshaas*, the people living there naturally attained all kinds of *siddhis*, and were living in great joy, without any effort. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yaani iti | Siddhih bhogaanaam svaabhaavikee, na krushi aadi saadhyaa | ***All their enjoyments, the things that they wanted, *dravyaas*, were naturally coming to them, without doing farming, or cultivating the land. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 26:   
Viparyayo na teshu asti jaraa mrutyu bhayam na cha |   
Dharma adharmou na teshu aastaam na uttama adhama madhyamaah || ***Grief and other things were never present there. Fear of death or old age was not present at all; the lifespan was decided; before that lifespan, there was no fear. It is not like *Vaikuntha*, where *jaraa, mrutyu * is not there. *Dharma * and *adharma * was not Page **5** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **there. *Uttama, madhyama, adhama *- this division was not there. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Viparyayo iti | Viparyayah dukha praachuryaadi | Jaraa mrutyu bhayam tat   
krlruptaat aayuh avadheh praak | Na dharma adharmou varna aashrama niyama   
bhaavena karma adhikaara abhaavaat |*** Whatever is the decided lifespan, before that, there was no death. *Akaala **mrutyu * was not there. There was no *varna aashrama niyama * there; there was no *karma adhikaara*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 27:   
Na teshu asti yugaa avasthaa \(dehaadihraasa lakshanaah\) kshetreshu ashtasu   
sarvadaa |   
Himaahvayam tu vai varsham naabheh aaseet mahaatmanah |   
Tasya rushabho abhavat putro merudevyaam mahaadyutih || ***There was no *yuga avasthaa*. Because there was no old age, they would not get old. They will be of the same age, and then would die, probably. Various changes due to *yuga*, etc. were not there. In *Naabhi's * kingdom, *Bhaaratavarsha, Himaahva*, he had a son by name *Rishabha*, through his wife *Merudevi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na iti | Atah poorva uktaat hetoh na yuga avasthaa | Saa hi dharma adharma   
hraasa vruddhi krutaa | Dehaadi hraasa lakshana iti eka vachana paathasya | ***





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 28:   
Rushabhaat bharato jajnye jyeshthah putrashatasya sah |   
Krutvaa raajyam svadharmena tathaa ishtvaa vividhaan makhaan || ****Rishabha * had a son called *Bharata*, who was the eldest of hundred sons he had. *Rishabha * ruled over the kingdom in a very wise way, and performed all kinds of *yajnyaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 29:   
Abhishichya sutam veeram bharatam pruthiveepatih |   
Tapase sa mahaabhaagah pulahasya aashramam yayou || ***Then he made his son *Bharata * as the king. He went to *Pulaha Aashrama, **Saalagraama*, for doing *tapas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Abhishichya iti | Pulahasya aashramam saalagraamam |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 30:   
Vaanaprastha vidhaanena tatra api kruta nischayah |   
Tapah tepe yathaa nyaayam iyaaja cha maheepatih || ***Page **6** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **Having gone to *Saalagraama * also, he lived the life of a *Vaanaprastha*; there also, he performed a lot of *yaagaas*, did *tapas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 31:   
Tapasaa karshito atyartham krusho dhamani santatah |   
Nagno \(vishtam\) veetaam mukhe krutvaa veeraadhvaanam tato gatah ||*** *Rishabha*, going to *Saalagraama*, living the life of *Vaanaprastha*, did all kinds of *tapas, **yajnyaas*, and he became very weak and very lean, due to tapas. He did *deha **dandana*, became very thin. His veins were visible. He was without wearing any cloth. He kept a ball of stone in his mouth, and attained *mahaa prasthaana *\(left the body\). 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tapasaa iti | \(Vishtam\) veetee kandukam | Sa cha atra mouna anashana   
vratasthaih shilaamayah kaaryah | Veeraadhvanam mahaa prasthaanam | ***Those who have taken the vow of not speaking and not eating, they keep a ball of stone in their mouth, so that they can't speak or eat anything. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 32:   
Tatah cha bhaaratam varsham etallokeshu geeyate |   
Bhaarataaya yatah pitraa dattam praatishtataa vanam || ****Bharata * became the king, and his kingdom is well known as *Bhaaratavarsha*. Because *Rishabha * gave his kingdom to *Bharata*, and then went to forest to do tapas, this kingdom came to known as *Bhaaratavarsha*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tata iti | Praatishtataa praatishtamaanena |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 33:   
Sumatih bharatasya abhoot putrah parama dhaarmikah |   
Krutvaa samyak dadou tasmai raajyam isthamakhah pitaa || ****Bharata * had a son who was very wise, and following the path of *dharma*, called *Sumati*. After having performed all the *yajnyaas, Bharata * gave the kingdom to him. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 34:   
Putra sankraamitashreeh tu bharatah sa maheepatih |   
Yogaabhyaasaratah praanaan saalagraame atyajat mune ||*** Having given the kingdom to his son *Sumati*, being established in *yogaabhyaasa*, he left his mortal body in *Saalagraama*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 35:   
Ayaajata cha vipro asou yoginaam pravare kule |   
Maitreya tasya charitam kathayishyaami te punah ||*** Page **7** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **Because of his *yogaabhyaasa*, he was born again in a great family of *yogis*, as a *Brahmin*. O *Maitreya*, I am going to tell the story of that *Bharata*, sometime later. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 36:***** *****Sumateh tejasah tasmaat indradyumno vyajaayata |***** *****Parameshti tatah tasmaat pratihaarah tat anvayah ||*** *Sumati * had a son called *Indradyumna. Indradyumna * had a son called *Parameshti. **Parameshti * had a son called *Pratihaara*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sumateh iti | Tejasah veeryaat |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 37:   
Pratihartaa iti vikhyaatah utpannah tasya cha aatmajah |   
Bhavah tasmaat atha udgeetah praastaavih tat suto vibhuh || ***His son was known as *Pratihartaa*. His son was *Bhava. Bhava's * son was *Udgeeta. **Udgeeta's * son was *Praastaavi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Pratihartaa iti | Bhava iti kasyachit naama | Bhuvah tasmaat iti cha paathah |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 38:   
Pruthuh tatah tato nakto naktasya api gayah sutah |   
Naro gayasya tanayah tat putro abhoot viraat tatah || ***Then *Pruthu * was born as son of *Prastaava*, then *Pruthu's* son *Nakta * was born, then *Nakta's* son *Gaya * was born. *Gaya's * son was *Nara*. His son was *Viraat*. The *vamshaavali * of *Priyavrata * was told in detail. At some point, *Gaya's * son *Nara * was born. His son was *Viraat*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 39:   
Tasya putro mahaaveeryo dheemaan tasmaat ajaayata |   
Mahaantah tat sutah cha abhoot manasyuh tasya cha aatmajah || ***His son was *Mahaaveerya* and his son was *Dheemaan*. *Dheemaan * had a son called *Mahaanta*. His son was *Manasyu*. *Viraat's * son was *Mahaaveerya*. His son was *Dheemaan*. His son was *Mahaanta. **Mahaanta's * son was *Manasyu*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tasya iti | Mahaanta iti kasyachit naama |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 40:   
Tvashtaa tvashtru cha virajo rajah tasya api abhoot sutah | ***Page **8** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Shatajit rajasah tasya jajnye putra shatam mune || ***Then *Manasyu's * son *Tvashtaa * was born, *Tvashtaa's * son *Viraja*, his son was *Raja*, his son was *Shatajit*, who had hundred sons. *Manasyu's * son was *Twashtaa. Twashtu's * son was *Viraja. Viraja's * son was *Rajas. Rajas*' son was *Shatajit. Shatajit * had hundred sons. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 41:   
Vishvagjyotipradhaanah te yerimaa vardhitaah prajaah |   
Taih idam bhaaratam varsham nava bhedam alankrutam ||*** Out of them, the prominent one was *Vishvajyoti*, and so their family continued to prosper in a great way. Thus, the nine parts of the *Bhaarata Varsha * were decorated by all these children. The prominent ones starting from *Vishvagjyoti*, all continued the progeny and that *vamsha * expanded. The nine divisions of the *Bhaarata Varsha*, was ruled over and enjoyed by the sons of *Shatajit*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vishvagjyotipradhaana iti | Te shatajit putraah | ***





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 42:   
Teshaam vamsha prasootaih cha bhukteyam bhaaratee puraa |   
Kruta treta aadi samjnyeya yugaakhyaa hi eka saptatih || ***This kingdom was ruled over and enjoyed by all people who were born in this *vamsha*. In *Kruta, Treta * and all these seventy one *yugaas*, they enjoyed. The *Bhaarata Varsha * was ruled over and enjoyed by all the people born in that *vamsha*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Teshaam iti | Bhaaratee bharatasyeyam bhooh iti bhaaratee | Kruta treta aadi   
samjnyeya yugaakhyaa krutaadi vyapadeshaih yugaih aakhyeyaa chaturyugaika   
saptatih iyam bhaaratee bhoorbhuktaa | Eka manvantaram bhukteti arthah |   
Eka saptatim iti kaalaadhvanoh iti dviteeyaa praaptaa; eka saptatih iti   
prathamaaprayoga arshatvaat saadhuh | Yat vaa yugaikasaptatimito yah   
kaalah tam kaalam bhuurbhukteti yat tat shabdayoh adhyaayaahaarah | Kruta   
tretaadi sargena yugaakhyaam eka saptatim iti paathe kruta aadi svabhaavena   
yugaih aakhyeyaam eka saptatim kaalam bhoorbhukteti | ***The land which belonged to *Bharata*, is called *Bhaaratee*. The *yugaas * which are named as *Kruta, Treta*, etc. - seventy one of these *chaturyugaas*, were enjoyed by them. Seventy one *chaturyugaas * form one *manvantara*. In one *kalpa*, there are fourteen *manvantaraas*. One *kalpa * is a thousand *chaturyugaas*. So, all these people ruled over for one *manvantara*. It should have been *eka saptatim*, as per grammar, Page **9** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **but it is *eka saptatih*, which is *aarsha, rishi prayoga*. The period limited by 71 *chaturyugaas*, is also the meaning. There is another *paathaantara * which is explained. They enjoyed *Bhaarata bhoomi * for 71 *chaturyugaas*, is told there. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 1, Shloka 43:   
Esha svaayambhuvah sargo yena idam pooritam jagat |   
Vaaraahe tu mune kalpe poorva manvantaraadhipah || ***This is *Svaayambhuva srushti*, with which all this world is filled. This is *Vaaraaha kalpa * and *Svaayambhuva manvantara*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Esha iti | Poorva manvantaraadhipe svaayambhuve manou sati, eshah eka   
saptati yuga avicchinnah sargah, svaayambhuvah svaayambhuvasya manoh   
sambandhee priyavrataadih | ***In the previous *manvantara, Svaayambhuva Manu * was the ruler. *Priyavrata * and others were related to *Svaayambhuva*. The creation for 71 *yugaas * without any break, was told; they enjoyed the kingdom. Related to *Svaayambhuva Manu, Priyavrata * and others, they enjoyed for 71 *chaturyugaas*, in the *Vaaraaha kalpa*. 





This concludes the First Chapter. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Dviteeya Amshe Prathamo Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Sri Vishnuchitteeye Dviteeye Amshe   
Prathamo Adhyaayah || ***



*** ***Page **10** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****   
|| Atha Dviteeyo Adhyaayah ||   
Jamboo Dveepa*** 



Now the Second Chapter of *Amsha * Two. 


