+++
title = "02"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 1:    
Maitreya uvaacha -   
Kathito bhavataa brahman sargah svaayambhuvasya me |   
Shrotum icchaami aham tvattah sakalam mandalam bhuvah || ****Maitreya* said - In *Svaayambhuva manvantara*, the details of the people who lived there, the *vamsha paramparaa*, was told by you, O *Brahman *\(Addressing *Paraasharar* as *Brahmavit*\). Now, I would like to listen from you the expanse of this whole world. 





## 2
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 2:    
Yaavantah saagaraah dveepaah tathaa varshaani parvataah |   
Vanaani saritah puryo devaadeenaam tathaa mune || ***What was the expanse over the oceans, the islands, the countries, the lands, the mountains, the forests, the streams, the cities, of *devaas* and all others. How the universe was divided, and what were the countries, I would like to know. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yaavantah iti | Dviraapatvaat dveepah | Varshaani kulaadryavacchinnaah   
dveepa amshaah | Varsha shabda nirvachanam maatsya uktam \*   
Vasantyrushantyo varsheshu prajaa yeshu chaturvidhaa | Rishirityesha ramane   
varshatvam tena teshu tat || iti | ****Dveepa* is explained as waters in two directions. The boundary of land, that space is called as *varsha*, which is bounded by *kula parvataas*, mountains. *Varsha* is where four kinds of people live, 





## 3
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 3:    
Yat pramaanam idam sarvam yat aadhaaram yat aatmakam |   
Samsthaanam asya cha mune yathaavat vaktum arhasi || ***What is the measure of all these. What was the expanse of all these. In whom was all these established, and controlled by whom, supported by whom. Please do tell me as it is. 





## 4
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 4:    
Sri Paraasharah - [[11]]   
***Maitreya shrooyataam etat samkshepaat gatado sama |   
Na asya varsha shatena api vaktum shakyo hi vistarah || ****Sri Paraasharar *- O *Maitreya*, I am going to tell you very briefly. Do listen to me. Even if I explain for hundred years, I will not be able to tell the complete details of this whole universe; it is so vast. 





## 5
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 5:    
Jamboo plakshaahvayou dveepou shaalmaleeschaaparo dvija |   
Kushah krounchah tathaa shaakhah pushkarah cha eva saptamah || ***There are seven *dveepaas, Jamboo dveepa, Plaksha, Shaalmalee, Kusha, Krouncha, **Shaakha* and *Pushkara*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bhoomandalam vaktum aadou tat avayava dveepaat utpattim aaha jamboo   
plakshaahvayou iti | ***Now, he starts to tell the various parts of *bhoo mandala*. 





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 6:    
Ete dveepaah samudraih tu sapta saptabhih aavrutaah |   
Lavanekshusuraasarpidadhidugdhajalaih samam ||*** All these islands, are covered, surrounded each by seven oceans. They are surrounded by oceans made of salt, sugarcane juice, wine, ghee, curd, milk, water. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ete iti | Samam sva sva aavaraneeya dveepa tulya vistaaram yathaa tathaa ete   
aavrutaah | ****Samam* means that it is covered everywhere, all around. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 7:    
Jamboodveepah samastaanaam eteshaam madhya samsthitah |   
Tasya api meruh maitreya madhye kanaka parvatah || ***In all these seven islands, in the centre, middle, is located the *Jamboo dveepa*. In the middle of that *Jamboo dveepa*, there is *Sumeru Parvata*, which is made of pure gold, gold mountain. 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 8:    
Chaturaasheeti saahasro yojanaih asya cha unchrayah ||*** The height of that *Sumeru Parvata*, is eighty four thousand *yojanaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Chaturiti | Sahasram eva saahasram asheetih eva aasheetih | Yojanaih   
chaturadhika asheetih sahasraani yasya sah, ucchreyah chaturaasheeti sahasrah   
| Asya ucchraayah chaturadhika asheeti sahasra yojana iti arthah | [[12]]   
Eight four thousand *yojanaas*, is the height of the *Meru parvata*, gold mountain. 





## 9
This whole *adhyaaya* is telling about the description of the whole universe, the countries, lands, mountains, etc. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 9:    
Pravishtah shodashaadhastaat dvaatrimshat moordhni vistrutah |   
Moole shodasha saahasro vistaarah tasya sarvashah || ***Below, it is sixteen thousand, and on the top, it is thirty two thousand *yojanaas*, in its expanse. At the base, it is sixteen thousand *yojanaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Pravishtah iti | Yojanaanaam shodasha sahasraani bhuvi khaatah | \* Hasto   
anguli vimshatyaa chaturanvitayaa chatushkaro dandah | Tat dvi sahasram   
krosho yojanam ekam bhavet chatushkrosham || iti ganite \* Ashtabhih   
avamadhyaih syaat angulam iti cha, dvaa trimshat sahasraani moordhni   
vyaasah, \* Sarvatra hi samavrutte vyaasah trigunah smruto bhavet paridhih, iti   
ganitajnyaah | Moola iti moole bhoomeh upari chaturdasha yojana sahasrou   
adhike |*** Sixteen thousand *yojanaas* it is inside the earth. There are some measures about which *Sri Engal Aalwaan* gives explanations. Twenty inches is called one *hasta*. Four of those *hastaas* is one *danda*. There is also a measure of a *hasta* as twenty four inches; *danda* will come to eight feet. Two thousand of that is said to be one *krosha*. Four *kroshaas* become one *yojana*; so eight thousand *dandaas* is one *yojana*. These are quoted from works on mathematics. The *urad daal*, eight of them put together is called on *angula*. Thirty two thousand of these is a *vyaasa. Paridhi* and *vyaasa* are measures. On top of the earth, fourteen thousand *yojanaas* are said to be there. 



Measure of one *yojanaa* is given differently in different works. 





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 10:    
Bhoopadmasya asya shailo asou karnikaakaara samsthitah || ****Karnikaa* means a case, a *kosha*, a seed cup. Mountain is like a seed cup, or the case of a lotus. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bhoo padmasya iti | \* Yat tat hi karnikaa moolam iti sat samprakeertitam | Tat   
yojana sahasraanaam saptatinaam adhah smrutam | Iti vaayu ukteh | Maatsye   
cha meru sannivesha uktah \* Vrutta aakruti pramaanah cha chaturasrah   
samutthitah | Vistaaraha trigunascha asya parinaahe sumandalah | ****Karnikaa* is narrower at the bottom and broad at the top. It is told in *Vaayu **Puraana* and *Maatsya Puraana* also like this. It is rounded, it is like this on both sides. It is like a *mandala aakaara*, the periphery is rounded. The expanse is three times. 



[[13]]   
**www.sadagopan.org** 





## 11
**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 11:    
Himavaan hemakootascha nishadhascha asya dakshine |   
Neelah shvetah cha shrungee cha uttare varsha parvataah ||*** To the south and north of this *Sumeru Parvata, Varsha parvataas* are there - these are the *parvataas* at the boundary of various countries. *Himavaan, Hemakoota, **Nishadha* are towards the south. *Neela. Shveta, Shrungee* are in the north. Immediately after *Meru parvata* in the south is *Nishadha*, after that is *Hemakoota*, and below that is *Himavaan*. On the north, *Neela* is immediately after *Meru parvata*, then is *Shveta*, and then *Shrungi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Himavaan iti | Varsha parvataah varshaanaam vibhekadaah parvataah | ****Varsha parvataas* are those which divide the countries. 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 12:    
Laksha pramaanou dvou madhyou dasha heenaah tathaa apare |   
Sahasradvitayocchraayaah taavat vistaarinah cha te || ***Immediately after *Meru parvata*, to the centre, is *Nishadha* and *Neela*, towards south and north. They are of the measure of one lakh *yojanaas*. The ones immediately next to them are ten thousand less, which is ninety thousand *yojanaas *- these are *Shveta* and *Hemakoota parvata*. Expanse of *Shrungi* and *Himavaan* is eighty thousand *yojanaas*. Two thousand *yojanaas* is the height; the same measure is the breadth also. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Laksha pramaanou iti | Uktaanaam varshaanaam madhye merum abhitah sthitou   
neela nishadhou laksha pramaanadaidhyou | Madhya iti paathe jamboo   
dveepasya iti sheshah | Pare chatvaaro lakshaat dashaamshena dasha sahasrena   
heenaah | Yathaa vaaraahe \* Jamboo dveepa pramaanena nishadhah   
parikeertitah | Tasmaat cha dasha bhaagena hemakootah praheeyate | Vimshat   
bhaagena himavaan tadvat eva praheeyate | Dveepasya mandaleebhaavaat   
ghraasa vruddhi prakeertite || iti | Anyatra cha \* Vruttaabhaavaat samudrasya   
mahee mandala bhaavatah | Aayaamaat pariheeyante chaturascha samaa   
mataah || iti | Evam neelaadishu api drashtavyam | ***To the north and south of *Meru Parvata, Neela* and *Nishadha*, which are there - their expanse is one lakh *yojanaas*. The remaining four are ten thousand *yojanaas* less compared to their immediate next ones. It is told in *Vaaraaha Puraana, Hemakoota* is ten less compared to *Nishadha*; *Himavaan* is twenty thousand *yojanaas* less compared to *Nishadha*. As the sea is circular, and also the *mandala aakaara* of the earth, these expanses are less, compared to their neighbours. In the same way, it is to be taken for *Neela* and others. 





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 13:  [[14]]   
***Bhaaratam prathamam varsham tatah kimpurusham smrutam |   
Harivarsham tathaa eva anyat meroh dakshinato dvija ||*** O Maitreya, on the southern side, the first country is *Bhaarata*, below the *Himavaan **parvata*. Between *Himavaan* and *Hemakoota*, is the country *Kimpurusha*, and then *Harivarsha*. To the south of *Meru*, are *Harivarsha, Kimpurusha* and *Bhaarata **Varsha*. 





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 14:    
Ramyakam cha uttaram varsham tasyaivaanu hiranmayam |   
Uttaraah kuravah cha eva yathaa vai bhaaratam tathaa ||*** Towards the north, in a similar way, there is *Ramyaka, Hiranmaya* and *Kurava*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ramyakam iti | Yathaa vai bhaaratam tathaa dhanuraakaaram iti arthah | \*   
Dhanus samsthe sthite jnyeye dve varshe dakshinottare | Deerghaani tatra   
chatvaari chaturashram ilaavrutam || iti vaayu ukteh |*** *Bhaarata varsha* is like a bow. If we imagine how a bow is composed, they are located at the various parts of a bow. 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 15:    
Nava saahasram ekaikam eteshaam dvijasattama |   
Ilaavrutam cha tat madhye souvarno meruh ucchritah ||*** Each one of these countries are nine thousand *yojanaas* in their expanse. In between, there is *Ilaavruta Varsha*, and at the centre of this is standing *Meru*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Nava saahasram iti | Ilaavrutam chatustrimshat sahasra yojana vistaaram   
bhadraashva ketu maalou praak pratyak dvaatrimshat yojanou iti artha siddham   
| \* Sahasram maalyavat gandhamaadanou iti vaayu ukteh | ***Thirty four thousand *yojanaas* is the expanse of *Ilaavruta; **Bhadraashva* and *Ketumaala* are on the east and west, which are thirty two thousand *yojanaas*, this is told in *Vaayu Puraana*. 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 16:    
Meroh chaturdisham tat tu nava saahasra vistrutam |   
Ilaavruttam mahaabhaaga chatvaarah cha atra parvataah || ***On the four directions of *Meru parvata*, nine thousand *yojanaas* expanse is the *Ilaavruta varsha*. Four mountains are also located there. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 17:    
Vishkambhaa rachitaa meroh yojanaayutam ucchritaah |   
Navaih sarobhih cha samam dikshvete kesara achalaah ||*** *Ilaavruta varsha* is also bounded by four mountains which are standing like a support, [[15]]   
buttress, which is ten thousand *yojanaas* high. It is as though supporting the *Meru **Parvata*. They are also surrounded by the nine *sarovaraas*, and also the four *kesara **achalaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vishkambhaa iti | Merot dvaarakaah keelaa vishkambhaah | ***They are supporting the *Meru parvata*. 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 18:    
Poorvena mandaro naama dakshine gandhamaadanah |   
Vipulah paschime paarshve supaarshvah cha uttare smrutah || ***The four *kesara achalaas* are *Mandara* on the eastern side, *Gandhamaadana* on the southern side, *Vipula* on the western side, *Supaarshva* on the north. 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 19:    
Kadambah cha teshu jambooh cha pippalo vata eva cha |   
Ekaadasha shataayaamaah paadapaah giri ketavah ||*** There are trees also around this, which are very tall, and they look as though banners or flag posts are mounted on top of the mountain. Their height is eleven hundred *yojanaas*. They are *Kadamba vruksha, Jamboo vruksha, Pippala vruksha, **Vata vruksha*. 





## 20
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 20:    
Mahaa gaja pramaanaani jambvaah tasyaah phalaani vai |   
Patanti bhoobhrutah prushthe sheeryamaanaani sarvatah ||*** These trees have fruits called *Jamboo phala*, which are very very big. They fall from the tree, and break on the ground upon impact. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Jamboo dveepa iti | Mahaa gaja iti \* Panchonnatih sapta gajasya dairghyam   
ashtou cha hastaah parinaahamaanam | Ekadvivruddhaavatha manda bhadrou   
sankeerna naagou niyata pramaanou || Iti vachanaat loukika gajasya dasha   
hasta aavarana pramaana prasiddheh, vaayunaa cha jamboo phalasya tatah   
adhikamaana ukteh mahaa gaja shabdo atra divya gaja vaachee | Yathaa aaha   
vaayuh "Aratneenaam shataani ashtou eka shasthi adhikaani tu | Phala   
pramaanam samkhyaatam munibhih tattva darshibhih ||" iti | ***Measure of the elephant, which is called *Mahaa gaja*, ten feet is the height of that elephant, width is fourteen feet, and periphery is sixteen feet \(a *hasta* is two feet\). The periphery is about twenty feet. *Vaayu Puraana* also says that the *jamboo phala* is much much bigger than the common elephant. Here, it is told about the *apraakruta **gaja*, which is there in the *deva loka*. Eight hundred and sixty one *aratnees*; twenty one inches is one *ratnee*, four *aratnees* are one *danda, aratnee* is also like a *hasta *- two feet. 861 times two feet is the measure of the *jamboo phala*. This is [[16]]   
what *rishis* who know the reality have told. *Jamboo phala* is a very huge fruit. 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 21:    
Rasena teshaam prakhyaataa tatra jaamboo nadeeti vai |   
Sarit pravartate cha api peeyate tat nivaasibhih ||*** The juice which coming out of this *jamboo* fruit, which are so huge, is forming a river called *Jamboo nadi*. Those who live around in those lands, they drink the waters of this *jamboo nadi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Rasena iti | Sarit pravartate; pradakshinam iti sheshah | Tat uktam - Merum   
pradakshineekrutya jamboo moolam vishati adhah, iti | ***It is as though doing *pradakshina* for *Meru*. Around that is the *Jamboo nadi* which is flowing. 





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 22:    
Na svedo na cha dourgandhyam na jaraa na indriya kshayah |   
Tat paanaat svaccha manasaam janaanaam tatra jaayate ||*** People who drink the juice of that *jamboo* fruit, they do not sweat at all, there is no bad smell coming from them, their sense organs never become weak, their mind is very clear and pure. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 23:    
Teeramrut tat rasam praapya sukha vaayu vishoshitaa |   
Jaamboonadaakhyam bhavati suvarnam siddha bhooshanam ||*** The mud which is there on the banks of that river, having absorbed the juice of this *Jamboo* river, and being dried by the winds around that, becomes gold. It is an ornament for all the *siddhaas*. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 24:    
Bhadraashvam poorvato meroh ketumaalam cha paschime |   
Varshe dve tu munishreshtha tayoh madhyam ilaavrutam ||*** To the east of *Meru*, there is a land called *Bhadraashva*. In the west, there is a land called *Ketumaala*. In between these two, is the country called *Ilaavruta*. 





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 25:    
Vanam chaitraratham poorve dakshine gandhamaadanam |   
Vaibhraajam paschime tadvat uttare nandanam smrutam || ***In all these four directions, there are forests \(or beautiful parks\) - *Chaitraratha **vana* is on the eastern side, *Gandhamaadana* is towards the south, *Vaibhraaja vana* is on the west, and *Nandana vana* is towards the north. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: [[17]]   
***Vanam iti | Vishkambhaadri prastheshu chaitraratha adi vanaani tat bahih   
saraamsi kesaraachalaa iti kramo vaayu uktah | ***In *Vaayu Puraana*, it is told that beyond *Vishkambhaadri*, the four mountains standing as buttresses or support for the *Meru Parvata*, are the *Chaitraratha* and these *vanaas*, and beyond these *vanaas* are the *sarovaraas*. Beyond these are the *kesaraachalaas*. 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 26:    
Arunodam mahaabhadram asitodam samaanasam |   
Samraasyetaani chatvaari deva bhogyaani sarvadaa ||*** There are also ponds on the four sides - *Arunoda, Mahaabhadra, Asitoda* and *Maanasa **Sarovaraas*. They are always enjoyed by the gods, *devaas*. 





## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 27:    
Sheetambhah cha kumundah cha kuraree maalyavaan tathaa |   
Vaikanka pramukhaa meroh poorvatah kesaraachalaah ||*** The *Kesaraachalaas* are told - these are the mountains around the *Meru. Sheetambha, **Kumunda, Kuraaree, Maalyavaan, Vaikanka* are the prominent *kesaraachalaas* towards the east of the *Meru*. 





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 28:    
Trikootah shishirah cha eva patango ruchakah tathaa |   
Nishadaadyaa dakshinatah tasya kesara parvataah || ***Towards the south of *Meru* are *Trikoota, Shishira, Patanga, Ruchaka, Nishada *- these *kesaraachalaas* are told.* **Kesara parvataas* are the places where trees with long filaments grow. 





## 29
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 29:    
Shikhivaasaah savaidooryah kapilo gandhamaadanah |   
Jaarudhi pramukhaah tadvat paschime kesaraachalaah || ****Shikhivaasa, Vaidurya, Kapila, Gandhamaadana, Jaarudhi* are the *kesaraachalaas* towards the west of *Meru*. 





## 30
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 30:    
Meroh anantaraangeshu jatharaadishu avasthitaah |   
Shankhakooto atha rushabho hamso naagah tathaa parah |   
Kaalanjanaadyaah cha tathaa uttare kesaraachalaah ||*** On the north, the *kesaraachalaas* which are immediately next to the *Meru*, are *Jathara* and others. *Shankakoota, Rushabha, Hamsa, Naaga, Kaalanjana* are there. Adjoining the *Meru* is the *Ilaavruta varsha*, it forms parts of that. In all these four *Maalyavaan, Nishadha, Gandhamaadana* and *Neela* mountains. It is in the which [[18]]   
forms the boundary - *Jathara, Devakoota* and others. On the western side is formed the boundary of *Nishadha* and *Pariyaatra*. *Kesaraparvataas* are there in all these mountains. There are many other mountains - they are also called as *kesaraachalaas*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Meroh iti | Meroh anantaraangeshu meroh anantaram varsham ilavrutam tasya   
angeshu avayaveshu maalyavat nishadha gandhamaadana neelaakhya   
varshaadrishu, tathaa ilaavrutasya eva vakshyamaanayoh praak   
seemaabhootayoh jathara devakootayoh paschaat seemaabhootayoh nishadha   
pariyaatrayoh cha avasthitaah kesara parvataah, esham antasthaah anye   
shailaah, ete cha kesara achalatvena ganyante | Teshaam maalyavat nishadha   
gandhamaadanaanaam sva shabdena neelasya tu kaala anjana shabdena cha   
keshareshu uktatvaat \* Patraani lokapadmasya maryaadaashaila baahyatah, iti   
vakshyamaanatvaat cha jatharaadinaam api kesaratvam yuktam | Ete sva   
varshaa apekshayaa varshaadrayah, patra apekshayaa maryaadaa adrayah,   
meru apekshayaa kesaraadrayah cha iti ayam artho gangaa chaturbheda   
prastaava pathishyamaana vaayu uktyaa vyakteebhavishyati | Eteshaam   
kesaraanaam \* kesaraastu shata ucchraayaah te asheeti pruthulaayaataah, iti   
vaayu uktam maanam jnyeyam |*** Immediately next to *Meru* is *Ilaavruta varsha*. Inside that is *Maalyavan, Maalyavaan, **Nishadha, Gandhamaadana, Neelaakhya* mountains are there. In *Ilaavruta* itself, in the eastern boundary, *Jathara, Devakoota*, etc. are the countries, after this boundary are *Nishada, Pariyaatra* and those mountains, *kesara parvataas*. Inside them are various other mountain peaks, they are all counted as *kesaraachalaas* only. *Jathara* and others are also *kesaraachalaas*, mountains which are located at the boundary of a land. These *kesaraachalaas* are also known as *Varshaadris *\(mountains forming the boundary of land\), these also show the limit and expanse of the land; with respect to *Meru*, they are called *kesaraachalaas*, is told in *Vaayu Puraana*. The filaments of the trees in these mountains which are hundred *yojanaas* high and eighty in circumference, are told. 



Next comes a description of *Brahmapuri* which is above *Meru*, in the sky. We saw the description of the universe, the mountains which are there, the *Meru, Jamboo **dveepa*, greatness of the *Jamboo phala*, the *vanaas* and *saras*, *kesaraachalaas* which are there. The description of geography is given wonderfully here. 





## 31
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 31:    
Chaturdasha sahasraani yojanaanaam mahaapuree |   
Meroh upari maitreya brahmanah prathitaa divi || ***Above the *Meru* mountain, in the sky, there is *Brahmapuri*, where a huge city of *Chaturmukha Brahma* is there, which is spread across fourteen thousand *yojanaas*. 





## 32
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 32:  [[19]]   
***Tasyaah samantatah cha ashtou dishaasu vidishaasu cha |   
Indraadi lokapaalaanaam prakyaataah pravaraah purah || ***All around that *Brahmapuri*, in all the directions, and in between directions, the cities of Indra and *devataas* are located, in all eight directions. 





## 33
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 33:    
Vishnu paada vinishkraantaa plaavayitvaa indumandalam |   
Samantaah brahmanah puryaam gangaa patati vai divah ||*** River *Gangaa*, which starts from the Lotus feet of Lord *Sri Mahaa Vishnu*, after flowing through the Chandra Mandala, from the *antariksha, Gangaa* falls flowing all around the *Brahmapuri*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Vishnu paada vinishkraanta iti | Divah - aakaashaat | Jyotishchaka bhraamaka   
pravaaha anilena chaturdhaa vibhaktaa brahmapuryaa bahih chaturdikshu   
merushrungeshu patati | Tathaa aaha vaayuh \* Vibhajyamaana salilaa taijasena   
anilena saa | Meroh antara kooteshu nipapaata chaturshu api || iti |*** *Divah* means from the skies. Around the *Brahmapuri*, in all four directions, it falls on the *parvata*, driven by the winds. In *Vaayu Puraana*, it is given that it is being divided by the *Taijasa* winds. Around *Meru*, it falls into four streams. 





## 34
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 34:    
Saa tatra patitaa dikshu chaturdhaa pratipadyate |   
Seetaa cha alakanandaa cha chakshurbhadraa cha vai kramaat ||*** When *Gangaa* falls, it gets divided into four streams. They are called *Seethaa, **Alakanandaa, Chakshu* and *Bhadraa*. 





## 35
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 35:    
Poorvena shailaat shailam tu seetaa yaati antarikshagaa |   
Tatah cha poorva varshena bhadraashvena eti saa arnavam ||*** These four streams, where all they fall, and where they merge, is told. On the Eastern direction, flowing through the skies from mountain to mountain, one stream of *Ganga* called *Seethaa*, reaches *Bhadraashva*, a city located on the Eastern side, and then merge into the ocean. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Poorvena iti | Shailaat shailam iti atra kramo ukto vaayuh \* Sheetaambu   
shikhara bhrashthaa kumunje varaparvate | Nipapaata mahaabhaagaa tasmaat   
api kuraryagam | Tasmaat maalyavatam shailam, iti upakramya \* evam shaila   
sahasraani daarayantee mahaanadee | Nipapaata tadaa seetaa jathare siddhi   
sevite || Tasmaat upagataa shailam devakootam taranginee || ityaadi |*** In *Vaayu Puraana*, it is told as to which are the mountains it flows through. Having fallen from the *Sheetaambu* mountain, it falls on *Kumunja*, from there, it goes [[20]]   
to *Kurari*, then to *Maalyavaan* mountain, this huge river, breaking through thousands of mountains, it finally falls on *Jathara* mountain, where all the *siddhaas* are living. Then it reaches *Devakoota* mountain. The order in which it flows is told in the *Vaayu **Puraana*, as quoted here. 





## 36
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 36:    
Tathaa eva alakanandaa api dakshinena etya bhaaratam |   
Prayaati saagaram bhootvaa sapta bhedaa mahaa mune ||*** In a similar way, the *Alakanandaa* river, which is one part of *Gangaa*, flows in the Southern direction, reaches *Bhaarata*, divides into seven streams, and then reaches the ocean. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tathaa eva iti | Alakanandaam cha adhikrutya \* Hemakootaat tu kailaasam   
devaa aavaasam tato api cha | Himavat uttamanadee nipapaata shilocchaye ||   
ityaadi | \* Kailaaso himavaan cha eva maryaadaa parvatou ubhou \* iti vaayu   
ukteh | Gandhamaadanasya himavat paadaadritvaat himavat shabdena uktih |*** *Vaayu Puraana* is quoted here. From there, it goes to *Kailaasa* and then to *Devaavaasa*, where *Devaas* live. *Kailaasa* and *Himavaan* are the mountains forming the boundary. *Gandhamaadana* mountain is at the end of the *Himavaan* mountain, it is told as *Himavaan* itself. 





## 37
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 37:    
Chakshuh cha paschima gireen ateetya sakalaamstatah |   
Paschimam ketumaalaakhyam varsham gatvaa eti saagaram ||*** The third stream is called *Chakshu*, crosses through the Western mountains, flows through *Ketumaala* country, and then reaches the ocean. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Chakshuh iti | Chakshuh prakarane \* Vaidooryaat kapilam shailam kapilaat   
gandhamaadanam | Evam shaila sahsasraani paarayantee mahaanadee | iti   
antena nishadham api atra samsoochya \* Paariyaatre mahaa shaile nipapaata   
aashugaaminee \* ityaadi uktam |*** Reaches *Vaidoorya, Kapila, Gandhamaadana* mountains. In this way, crossing through thousands of mountains, *Nishadha* also, finally goes and falls on *Paariyaatra* mountain. 





## 38
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 38:    
Bhadraa tathaa uttaragireen uttaraam cha tathaa kuroon |   
Ateetya uttaram ambhodhim samabhyeti mahaa mune || ***The fourth stream, *Bhadraa*, crosses through the Northern mountains, and then *Uttara **Kuru Varsha* country, and goes and reaches the ocean. 



[[21]]   
***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bhadraa iti | Bhadraam prakrutya \* Trishrungam shrunga kalilam maryaadaa   
parvatam gataa | Trishrungatah paribhrashtaa jaarudhim parvatam gataa ||   
ityaadi | Bhaarata varshe alakanandaa bhedaah sapta maatsya uktaah \* Nalinee   
hlaadinee cha eva paavanee praachagaah trayah | Seetaa chakshuh cha sindhuh   
cha tisraah taa vai prateechyagaah || Saptamee tu anvagaat gangaa dakshinena   
bhageeratham || iti | ***Crosses over *Trishrunga, Jaarudhi*. In *Matsya Puraana*, it is said that *Alakanandaa* divides into seven streams, in the *Bhaarata varsha - Nalinee, **Hlaadinee, Paavanee* are the three streams which flow towards east; *Seethaa, **Chakshu, Sindhu* are the three streams flowing towards west; the seventh one flows in the southern direction, and is *Bhageeratha*. 





## 39
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 39:    
Aaneela nishadhaayaamou maalyavat gandhamaadanou |   
Tayoh madhyagato meruh karnikaakaara samsthitah ||*** *Maalyavaan* and *Gandhamaadana* mountains, are spread from *Neela **parvata* to *Nishadha parvata*. In between *Meru* is looking like a *kosha*, seed cup. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aneela iti | Poorvam kesareshu uktou maalayavat gandhamaadanou bhadraashva   
ketumaala varsha parvatou dakshina uttarou chatushtrimshat sahasraayaamou |   
Atra vaayuh \* Chatushtrimshat sahasraani gandhamaadana parvatah | Udak   
dakshinatah cha eva aaneelanishadhaa yatah | Chatushtrimshat sahasraani   
parivruddho maheetalam | Sahasram avagaadhah cha taavat eva cha vismrutah   
|| Poorvena maalyavaan shailah tat pramaanah prakeertitah || iti |*** Earlier, it was told in the *kesaraachalaas, Maalyavaan* and *Gandhamaadana*, that they are spreading from south to north, for 34000 *yojanaas*. 34000 *yojanaas* is the expanse of *Gandhamaadana parvata*, from south to north, starting from *Neela* to *Nishadha*; its height is 34000 *yojanaas*, it is 1000 *yojanaas* inside, and its spread is also 1000 *yojanaas*. On the eastern side, *Maalyavaan* mountain is also of the same measure. This is told in *Matsya Puraana*. 





## 40
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 40:    
Bhaarataah ketumaalaah cha bhadraashvaah kuravah tathaa |   
Patraani lokapadmasya maryaadaa shaila baahyatah || ***This *shloka* was quoted earlier in the commentary. There are four countries -*Bhaarata, Ketumaala, Bhadraashva, Kuru*. These are located beyond the bounding mountains. They are looking like petals of a lotus. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***** *****Bhaaratah iti | Maryaadaa shaila baahyata iti | Maryaadaadrayo ashtou   
jatharaadyaah, tebhyo bahih bhadraashvaadeeni chatuh patraani | Teshu cha [[22]]   
***maryaadaadrishu maalyavatah praachyaam jatharah, tat praachyaam   
devakootah, evam himavato dakshinatah kailaasaah tato gandhamaadanah, tou   
cha himavat samaayaamou; tathaa gandhamaadana varshaadreh paschimo   
nishadhah, tat bahih paariyaatrah, evam shrungina uttaratah trishrungah tato   
jaarudhih | Atra arthe praak darshito vaayu ukta gangaa pravaaha kramah   
pramaanam |*** *Maryaada* means the boundary of an area. *Maryaadaa parvata* means the mountains forming the boundary, border, limits of a country. There are eight mountains forming the boundary - *Jathara* and others. Beyond these *maryaadaa* mountains, *Bhadraashva* and four *patraas* are located. Among those *maryaadaa* mountains, bounding mountains, to the east of *Maalyavaan* mountain, there is *Jathara*. To the east of *Jathara*, is *Devakoota*. In the same way, to the south of *Himavaan* is *Kailaasa*, then *Gandhamaadana. **Kailaasa* and *Gandhamaadana* are spread across the same area as *Himavaan*. On the western side of *Gandhamaadana* is *Nishadha*. After that is *Paariyaatra*. There is *Trishrunga* to the north of that, and then *Jaarudhi* to its north. The mountains through which *Gangaa* passes through was told in the *Vaayu Puraana*. This is according to that. 





## 41
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 41:    
Jatharo hemakootascha maryaadaa parvatou ubhou |   
Tou dakshinottaraayaamou aneelanisadhaayatou ||*** *Jathara* and *Hemakoota* are the two mountains at the boundary. From south to north, they are spread across, from *Neela* mountain to *Nishadha* mountain. 





## 42
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 42:***** *****Gandhamaadana kailaasou poorvavat chaayatou ubhou |***** *****Asheeti yojanaayaamou arnava antarvyavasthitou ||*** *Gandhamaadana* and *Kailaasa* are to the east, 80 *yojanaas*, they are located inside the ocean. 





## 43
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 43:    
Nishadhah pariyaatrah cha maryaadaa parvatou ubhou |   
Meroh paschima dik bhaage yathaa poorve yathaa sthitou ||*** *Nishadha* and *Paariyaatra* are *maryaadaa parvataas*, mountains forming the boundary, are located on the western side, just as there are mountains on the eastern side. 





## 44
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 44:    
Trishrungo jaarudhih cha eva uttare varsha parvatou |   
Poorvavat chaayatou etou arnavaantarvyavasthitou ||*** *Trishrunga* and *Jaarudhi* are the two *parvataas* on the northern side. Just like on the eastern side, they are also spread across in the same measure, and are located inside the ocean. [[23]]   






## 45
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 45:    
Iti ete munivarya uktaa maryaadaa parvataah tava |   
Jatharaadyaah sthitaah meroh teshaam dvou dvou chaturdisham || ***I have told you, O *Maitreya*, about the mountains which form the boundaries of the various countries, *Jathara* and others, which are there. On all the four directions of *Meru*, two mountains each are located. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ityeta iti | Ete jatharaadyaa maryaadaaparvataa uktaah | Meroh chaturdisham   
patra mooleshu eshaam dvou dvou sthitou tou uktou | ****Jathara* and other *maryaadaa parvataas* were told. At the bottom of the *patra*, two mountains each are located in the four directions. *Patra* means, like the petals of a lotus. 





## 46
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 46:    
Meroh chaturdisham ye tu proktaah kesara parvataah |   
Sheetaadyaah cha mune teshaam ateeva hi manoramaah |   
Shailaanama antare dronyah siddha chaarana sevitaah ||*** On all the four sides of *Meru*, the *kesara parvataas* were told. *Sheeta* and others, the *kesara parvataas* which were told, they are all very beautiful places. In these *Sheeta* and other mountains, there are very beautiful ponds which are there, in between mountains, where *siddhaas* and *charanaas* live. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Meroh iti | Drounyah pushkarinyah \* Shree saras taamraparnam cha kesaram   
ramanee tathaa ityaadyaah | Avaapta ashtaguna aishvaryaah siddhaah;   
chaaranaah deva gaayakaah | ****Droni* means *pushkarini. Siddhaas* are those who have *ashta aishwarya *- *Animaa mahimaa chaiva garima laghimaa tathaa | **Praaptih praakaamyam eeshatvam vashitvam cha ashta siddhayah || *They attain various *siddhis* through *yoga*. They can become very minute, very big, etc. Those who have attained them are called *siddhaas. Chaaranaas* are singers among gods. 



The *pushkarinis* are told - *Shree saras, Tamraparna, Kesara, Ramanee*, etc. Here *siddhaas* and *chaaranaas* live. 





## 47
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 47:    
Suramyaani tathaa taasu kaanaanaani puraani cha |   
Lakshmee vishnu agni sooryaa aadi devaanaam munisattama |   
Taasu aayatana varyaani jushtaani vara kinnaraih ||*** There, very beautiful cities and forests are there, where sacred temples are built [[24]]   
for *Lakshmi, Vishnu, Agni, Surya*, and the other *devataas*. They are all worshipped there by *kinnaraas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Suramyaani iti | Kaananaani \* Shreevanam kimshuka vanam nalam cha panasam   
tathaa ityaadeeni puraani \* Himachitram bhoota vanam brahma paarshvam   
sunaabhakam ityaadeeni | ****Shreevana, Kimshukavana, Nala, Panasa* are the forests. Cities are *Himachitram, **Bhootavana, Brahmapaarshva, Sunaabhaka*, etc. 





## 48
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 48:    
Gandharva yaksha rakshaamsi tathaa daiteya daanavaah |   
Kreedanti taasu ramyaasu shailadroneeshu aharnisham ||*** In these beautiful ponds which are there in between mountains, *Gandharvaas, **Yakshaas, Rakshas, Daityaas* and *Daanavaas*, live and sport there day and night. 





## 49
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 49:    
Bhoumaa hi ete smrutaah svargaa dharminaam aalayaa mune |   
Na eteshu paapa karmaano yaanti janma shataih api ||*** These are known to be the *svarga* of the earth, heavens of the earth. Where all the people who follow the path of dharma, live there. Those who have committed sins, cannot live here even after hundreds of births; they do not get to be born in such places. 





## 50
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 50:    
Bhadraashve bhagavaan vishnuh aaste hayashiraa dvija |   
Varaahah ketumaale tu bhaarate koorma roopa dhruk || ***In *Bhadraashva varsha, Bhagavaan Mahaa Vishnu* is present in the form of *Hayagreeva*. In *Ketumaala varsha*, He is present in the form of *Varaaha*, and in *Bhaarata*, He is present in the form of *Koorma*. 





## 51
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 51:    
Matsya roopah cha govindah kurushu aaste sanaatanah |   
Vishva roopena sarvatra sarvah sarveshvaro harih ||*** And *Sanaatana Govinda* is present in the form of *Matsya*, in *Kuru varsha*. Though He is present in these forms in the four *varshaas*, He is present everywhere, and everything is Him only; everywhere He is present in the form of *Vishvaroopa*. The entire world, *Vishva*, itself is His form. 





## 52
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 52:    
Sarvasya aadhaarabhootou asou maitreya aaste akhila aatmakah ||*** Everything is *Bhagavat aatmaka*. He is controller of everything and supporter of everything. [[25]]   






## 53
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 53:    
Yaani kimpurusha aadeeni varshaani ashtou mahaamune |   
Na teshu shoko na aayaaso na udvegah kshut bhaya aadikam || ****Kimpurusha* and the eight countries told earlier, O great sage *Maitreya*, people who live there do not have grief, do not get tired, they don't get stressed or agitated, don't get anxiety, don't have any hunger, no fear. 





## 54
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 54:    
Svasthaah prajaah niraatankaah sarva dukha vivarjitaah |   
Dasha dvaadasha varshaanaam sahasraani sthira aayushah ||*** Without any fear or anxiety, they live there very happily, having got rid of all the grief and sorrow. They live for ten or twelve thousand years. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Svasthaah iti | Dasha dvaadasha iti aniyama uktih laingaadi uktam sthaana   
visheshaat chaturdasha sahasra paryantam aayuh sthitim lakshayati | ***It can be anything - ten or twelve - in the *Lainga Puraana*, it is told that it is actually up to fourteen thousand years. ***   


## 55
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 55:    
Na teshu varshate devo bhoumaani ambhaamsi teshu vai |   
Kruta treta aadikaa na eva teshu sthaaneshu kalpanaa ||*** At that place, gods to not provide rains, there is no rains there; water in the earth is always there. In these places, these eight countries, there is no distinction of *Kruta **yuga, Treta yuga*, and others. 



Distinctions of *Kruta, Treta* come when *dharmaas* are being implemented. When all the time the people are like this - without grief, anxiety, fear, etc., and they live for fourteen thousand years, there is no division of *Kruta, Treta*, etc. ***   


## 56
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 2, Shloka 56:    
Sarveshu eteshu varsheshu sapta sapta kulaachalaah |   
Nadyah cha shatashah tebhyah prasootaa yaa dvijottama ||*** In all these countries, *Kimpurusha* and others, seven *kulaachalaas* are there, there are hundreds of rivers. 



This is the greatness of *Kimpurusha* and other countries. 



This concludes the Chapter Two. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Dviteeye Amshe Dviteeyo Adhyaayah ||   
 [[26]]   
***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Dviteeye Amshe   
Dviteeyo Adhyaayah || ***



*** [[27]]   
***   
|| Atha Triteeyo Adhyaayah ||   
Bhaarata Varsha*** 



Now, the Chapter Three. 


