+++
title = "03"

+++


*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 1:   
Sri Paraasharah -   
Uttaram yat samudrasya himaadreh cha eva dakshinam |   
Varsham tat bhaaratam naama bhaaratee yatra santatih || ****Sri Paraasharar *- To the north of the ocean, and to the south of the *Himavaan **parvata*, the place, *varsha * is called *Bhaarata varsha*. All are *Bhaarateeyaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Uttaram iti | Samudrasya puraatanasya na tu sagara suta khaatasya |   
Bhaaratee bharatasya raajnyah sambandhinee | ****Samudra * is existing for a long time; it is not the one formed by the digging by *Sagara's * sons. *Bhaaratee * means related to King *Bharata*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 2:   
Nava yojana saahasro vistaaro asya mahaamune |   
Karma bhoomih iyam svargam apavargam cha gacchataam ||*** Nine thousand *yojanaas * is the expanse of this *Bhaarata varsha*. Those who want to attain *svarga *\(heavens\), and *apavarga *\(liberation, *moksha*\), this *Bhaarata varsha * is the place where they can perform the suitable *karmaas*, and attain those fruits. This is the *karma bhoomi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Nava yojana iti | Vistaarah dakshina uttaratah; aayaamah tu hjimavat paarshve   
himavataa samah, dakshinato dakshinatah kinchit kinchit nyoonah |*** 9000 *yojanaas * is the spread from south to north. At the bottom of the *Himavaan * mountain, the breadth is the same as *Himavaan * mountain. As you go down towards south, it gets lesser and lesser; so it is tapering down. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 3:   
Mahendro malayah sahyah shuktimaan ruksha parvatah |   
Vindhyah cha paariyaatrah cha sapta atra kula parvataah ||*** The *sapta kula parvataas * which are told are *Mahendra, Malaya, Sahyaadri, **Shuktimaan, Ruksha, Vindhya, Paariyaatra*. 



Page **28** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 





**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 4:   
Atah sampraapyate svargo muktim asmaat prayaanti cha |   
Tiryaktvam narakam cha api yaanti atah purushaa mune ||*** From the *Bhaarata varsha*, people attain heavens, they also get liberated, attain *mukti*. They also attain lower births like animals, they also got to hell. People attain these various fruits from here. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ata iti | Ato muktim prayaanti cha iti vachanam asmin bhaarata varshe muktih   
syaat iti etaavat vaktum; na tu anyatra nisheddhum; karma bhoomeh anyatra   
api brahma vidyaa saadhyasya mokshasya upapatteh | Sootra kaarena \*   
Taduparyapi ityaadinaa sootrena devaadeenaam api brahma vidyaa   
adhikaarasya uktatvaat |*** In this *Bhaarata varsha*, people can perform suitable *karmaas * and attain liberation. It is said that they can attain *moksha * from *Bhaarata varsha*. Does not mean that anyone who has to attain *moksha * has to be born here, and then only attain *moksha*. It does not negate people attaining *moksha * in other places, but this is told to highlight the greatness of *Bhaarata varsha*. Even in other places which are not said to be *karma **bhoomi*, in order to attain *moksha*, one has to practice *Brahma vidyaa*; this *Brahma **vidyaa * can be practices even in other places. Even *devataas * are eligible for adopting *Brahma vidyaa*, and can attain *moksha*; this is established clearly in the *Brahma Sutraas*, as told by *Sootra kaara Baadaraayana*. People in other *lokaas * can also attain *moksha*, it is told; because they have a desire to attain, they have the capability to do *Brahma vidyaa*, so it is possible for them also; they also have *adhikaara * for *Brahma vidyaa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 5:   
Itah svargah cha mokshah cha madhyam cha antah cha gamyate |   
Na khalu anyatra martyaanaam karma bhoomou vidheeyate ||*** First it is told heaven and liberation, then it is told that *madhyam \(antariksha*, various *lokaas*\) and *anta \(naraka*\) are the places they can attain. Is it not well known that in other places, for humans, *karma * is not ordained. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Uktam artham upapaadayati ita ityaadinaa | Madhyam antariksha aadi | Antah   
narakah | Poorvam phalavachanam, atra tat aadhaara loka vachanam iti   
apunaruktih | Na khalu ityaadi | Khalu shabdah \(hetou\) prasiddha parah |   
Anyatra bhoomou kimpurusha aadi varsha ashtake pushkara dveepe cha karma   
na vidyate | Arthaat na nishpadyate cha | Plaksha aadi dveepa panchake tu   
aapavargika itara karma na vidheeyate; aapavargika karmaanaam tatra api   
anushthaana ukteh; \* Yathoktakarmakartrutvaat svaadhikaara kshayaaya te |   
Yajantah kshapayanti ugram adhikaaram phala pradam || iti   
vakshyamaanatvaat | \* Daanaani cha atra deeyante para loka artham aadaraat ***Page **29** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****\* iti ukteh bharata vishayatvaat cha |*** What was told in the earlier *shloka * is justified here. *Svarga * and *moksha * are the fruits directly told. *Madhyam * means those worlds in the middle, *antariksha. Anta * is the world which are below, *naraka * and other places. What was told earlier that there is no *Kruta, Tretaa yugaas * in *Kimpurusha * and the eight countries, and *Pushkara **dveepa * also, *karma * is not ordained. *Karma * is not negated also. One can follow *karma * if required, but it is not ordained like in *Bhaarata varsha*. In *Plaksha * and five islands, *karmaas * required for attaining fruits other than *moksha * are not ordained. In *Plaksha * and five *dveepaas*, the *karmaas * which are required for attaining *moksha*, are being performed there. It is going to be told later, when performing *karmaas * which are as told, according to the *punya * done earlier, they are given positions like *Vasishta * and others, they are called *aadhikaarika purushas*. It is asked about why *Vasishta * did not do *deha avasaana prapatti*, and attain *moksha*; they are *aadhikaarika purushaas*, they have performed much *punya*, and have been put in that position by *Paramaatman * in order to perform certain things, and also guide the people of the world. In order to spend the *adhikaara*, to exhaust it so that they can attain *moksha*, and also performing the *yaagaas*, etc., they get rid of all the remaining *karmaas * there. In *Plaksha * and other *dveepaas*, they also do *daana*, is also told. 



*Apavarga * means *moksha*. *Dharma, artha, kaama * is one, and *apavarga * is the other. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 6:   
Bhaaratasya asya varshasya nava bhedaan nishaamaya |   
Indradveepah kasheruh cha taamraparno gabhastimaan ||*** In the *Bhaarata varsha*, there are nine divisions. *Indradveepa, Kasheru, Taamraparna, **Gabhastimaan*, ... 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bhaaratasya ityaadi | Samudra velaam aarabhya himavat antam indradveepa   
aadyaa madhye madhye sagara suta khaata antaritaah sahasra yojana   
vistaaraah bhaarata varsha antara dveepaah nava; tena saagara samvrutatvam   
navaanaam, na tu ekasyaiva asya navamasya bhaarataakhyasya; \* Bhaaratasya   
asya varshasya nava bhedaan nibodhata | Saagara antaritaa jnyeyaa te   
tvagamyaah parasparam || iti vaayu ukteh || ***Starting from the banks of the ocean, till the *Himavaan * mountain, various *dveepaas * are located, based on the digging of the earth by the sons of *Sagara * in order to find the horse of the *yaaga*, these islands were formed when they dug like that, they are of thousands of *yojanaas * in expanse; there are nine islands in the *Bhaarata varsha*, all these nine are surrounded by ocean, not just the ninth one called *Bhaarata*. In the *Vaayu Puraana*, it is mentioned that all of them are surrounded by ocean. 



Page **30** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 





**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 7:   
Naaga dveepah tathaa soumyo gaandharva tu atha vaarunah |   
Ayam tu navamah teshaam dveepah saagara samvrutah || ***... *Naagadveepa, Soumya, Gaandharva, Vaaruna*, ninth one is called *Dveepa * itself - this is actually the *Bharata khanda*, which is surrounded by oceans. 



In *sankalpa*, we say *Bhaarata varshe, Bharata khande*; this *Bharata khanda * is told as *Dveepah*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Naaga dveepah iti | Ayam tu dveepo bhaarataakhyah | Tat uktam vaaraahe \*   
Indrah kasheruh taamra varno gabhastimaan naagah soumyo gaandharvo   
vaaruno bhaaratah cha, iti | Saagara samvrutaa iti vaa paathah |*** *Dveepa * stands for *Bharata khanda*. In the *Varaaha Puraana*, it is clearly mentioned that *Indra, Kasheru, Taamraparna, Gabhastimaan, Naaga, Soumya, Gandharva, **Vaaruna * and *Bhaarata*, are the nine parts of *Bhaarata varsha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 8:   
Yojanaanaam sahasram tu dveepo ayam dakshina uttaraat |   
Poorve kiraataa yasya ante paschime yavanaah sthitaah ||*** From south to north, 1000 *yojanaas * is the expanse of this *dveepa, Bharata khanda*. In the eastern direction, *Kiraataas * are there, and in the west, *Yavanaas * are there. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 9:   
Brahmanaah kshatriyaah vaishyaah madhye shoodraah cha bhaagashah |   
Ijya aayudha vanijya aadyaih vartayanto vyavasthitaah || ***In the middle, *Braahmanaas, Kshatriyaas, Vaishyaas * and *Shoodraas * are there. They are engaged in their daily living, for which they do *yaagaas *\(for *Braahmanaas*\), with weapons \(for *Kshatriyaas*\), business \(for *Vaishyaas*\), and others. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 10:   
Shatadru chandrabhaaga aadyaah himavat paada nirgataah |   
Veda smruti mukha aadyaah cha paariyaatra udbhavaa mune ||*** The various rivers flowing from the mountains are told here. *Shatadru, **Chandrabhaaga*, rivers start out flowing from the base of *Himavaan*. From the *Paariyaatraa * mountain, *Veda, Smruti*, rivers start. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 11:   
Narmadaa surasaadyaah cha nadyo vindyaadri nirgataah |   
Taapee payoshnee nirvindhyaah pramukhaa rukshasambhavaah || ***From *Vindyaadri, Narmadaa, Surasaadyaa*, are born. From the *Rukshaa * mountain, *Taapee, Payoshnee, Nirvindhyaa*, rivers start. 



Page **31** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 





**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 12:   
Godaavaree bheemarathee krushnavenee aadikaah tathaa |   
Sahya paada udbhavaah nadyaah smrutaah paapa bhayaapahaah ||*** *Godaavaree, Bheemarathee, Krushnavenee*, rivers are starting from *Sahyaadri*. These rivers purify, and people who take bath in them get rid of fear of sins. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 13:   
Krutamaalaa taamraparnee pramukhaa malaya udbhavaah |   
Trisaamaa charshikulyaadyaa mahendra prabhavaah smrutaah ||*** From the *Malaya * mountain, *Krutamaalaa, Taamraparnee * rivers are flowing out. From *Mahendra parvata, Trisaamaa, Charshikulyaa * rivers flow. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 14:   
Rushikulyaah \(Aaryakulyaah\) kumaaraadyaah shuktimat paada sambhavaah |   
Aasaam nadi upanadyah cha santi anyaah cha sahasrashah ||*** From *Shuktimaan, Rushikulyaa * and *Kumaara * rivers start. For these rivers, there are thousands and thousands of smaller rivers. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 15:   
Taasu ime kuru paanchaalaa madhya desha aadayo janaah |   
Poorva desha aadikaah cha eva kaama roopa nivaasinah ||*** People who are living in the middle parts *Kuru Paanchaala*, the people living in the eastern side, people living in the *Kaama roopa*, ... 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Taasu iti | Kaama roopo deshah |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 16:   
Pundraah kalingaa magadhaah dakshinaatyaah cha sarvashah |   
Tathaa aparaantaah souraashtraah shooraabheeraah cha barbaraah || ***... *Pundraas, Kalingaas, Magadhaas, Dakshinaatyaas, Aparaantaas, Souraashtraas, **Shooraas, Aabheeraas, Barbaraas*, ... 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 17:   
Kaarooshaah maalavaah cha eva paariyaatra nivaasinah |   
Souveeraah saindhavaah hoonaah saalvaa kosalavaasinah || ***... *Kaalooshaas, Maalavaas*, those who live in *Paariyaatraa, Souveeraas, Sandhavaas, **Hoonaas, Saalvaas*, people living in *Kosala*, ... 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 18:   
Maadraaraamaah tathaa ambaashthaah paaraseekaadayah tathaa |   
Aasaam pibanti salilam vasanti saritaam sadaa |   
Sameepato mahaabhaaga hrushta pushta jana aakulaah ||*** Page **32** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **... *Maadraaraamaas, Ambashtaas, Paaraseekaas*, all these people, live near the rivers, and also consume the waters of these rivers, are well fed and nurtured, and are healthy and happy. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 19:   
Chatvaari bhaarate varshe yuga anyatra mahaa mune |   
Krutam tretaa dvaaparah cha kalih cha anyatra na kaschit || ***In the *Bhaarata varsha*, these four *yugaas * are found - *Kruta, Tretaa, **Dvaapara * and *Kali*; these are not seen in other places. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Chatvaari iti | Chatvaari yugaani | Dharma paada vyavasthaa yuga vyavasthaa   
|*** In *Kruta yuga*, dharma stands on all four legs. In *Tretaa yuga*, on three legs; *Dvaapara **yuga * on two legs; and *Kali yuga * on one leg. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 20:   
Tapah tapyanti munayo juhvate cha atra yajvanah |   
Daanaani cha atra deeyante para lokaartham aadaraat ||*** The sages are engaged in *tapas*, those who perform the *yaagaas * are performing the *yaagaas*, people give *daanaas*, in order to get *paraloka*, *svarga, apavarga*. The *munis* are engaged in *tapas*, those who perform the *yaagaas* are performing the *yaagaas*. In order to get *sadgati*, people give *daanaas*. 





The greatness of *Bhaarata varsha * is going to be told next. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 21:   
Purushaih yajnya purusho jamboodveepe sadaa ijyate |   
Yajnyaih yajnyamayo vishnuh anyadveepeshu cha anyathaa ||*** All the time, in *Jamboo Dveepa*, the *purushaas* worship *Yajnya Purusha, Bhagavaan*. All the people worship *Vishnu* as *Yajnya Purusha* Himself, performing various *yajnyaas*. In other *dveepaas*, He is worshipped in different forms. 



*Veda* says ' *Yajnya vai vishnuh*'. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Purushaih ityaadi | Yajnya purushah vishnuh atra yajnya roopa ijyate |   
Anyathaa soma vaayu aadi roopah |*** In other places, *Vishnus* worshipped as *Soma, Vaayu*, etc. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 22:   
Atra api bhaaratam shreshtham jamboo dveepe mahaa mune |   
Yato hi karmabhooh eshaa hi ato anyaa bhoga bhoomayah ||*** Page **33** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **Even among all the places in this *Jamboo Dveepa, Bhaarata Varsha* is the most preferred and excellent one, because this is said to be *karma bhoomi*, whereas other places are said to be *bhoga bhoomis*, places of enjoyment. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 23:   
Atra janma sahasraanaam sahasraih api sattama |   
Kadaachit labhate jantuh maanushyam punya sanchayaat ||*** Why is it praised so much? Because thousands of thousands of births, accumulating a lot of *punya*, one gets to be born as a human in this *Bhaarata Varsha*. It is so difficult to be born as a human in *Bhaarata Varsha*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 24:   
Gaayanti devaah kila geetakaani dhanyaah tu te bhaarata te bhoomi bhaage |   
Svarga apavarga aaspada maarga bhoote bhavanti bhooyah purushaah suratvaat   
||*** This is the reason why the gods sing the praises of this land. Even gods, *devaas* sing praises of this land. Gods, *devaas* are talking among themselves that they have all attained *svarga*, due to some *punya karma* done; once this *punya* ends, they have to come back to this world, but nobody knows where who will be born. They say that whoever is born at the end of a term in *svarga* as *devataas*, after that term comes to an end, if they are born as humans in *Bhaarata varsha*, they are *dhanyaah*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Gaayanti iti | Ye devaah suratvaat suratvaat anantaram tatra bhaarate   
bhooyah purushaah manushyaah syu te dhanyaah |*** Once they enjoy the *svarga loka* as *devaas* because of their *punya*, after their term is over, they come back here, since this is *karma bhoomi*, they can perform *yajnyaas* and *yaagaas*, and they attain either *svarga* or *apavarga* from here. Even from *svarga*, they can attain *apavarga*, but because it is *bhoga bhoomi*, they will not get that kind of a desire to attain *moksha*. Here, it is easy, to perform *yaagas*, the means to attain *svarga* or *apavarga*. So, whoever is born in *Bhaarata Varsha* as humans are *dhanyaah*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 25:   
Karmaani asankalpita tat phalaani sanyasya vishnou paramaatma bhoote |   
Avaapya taam karma maheem anante tasmin layam ye tu amalaah prayaanti ||*** Performing *karmaas* without any desire in fruits thereof, performing *karmaas* as *svayam prayojana, svasmai svayam eva kaarayati*, with *saatvika tyaaga*, giving up the desire for fruits, and offering it as worship at the Lotus Feet of *Vishnu, Paramaatman*, they go at the end of their term here, they go and attain *Vishnu* Himself, being purified completely, having got rid of all the *karma **bandhaas*. *** ***Page **34** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Etat samarthayati karmaani iti | Atra api te dhanyaah iti anushangah |*** This *shloka* justifies that they are *dhanyaah*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 26:   
Jaaneema na etat kva vayam vileene svargaprade karmani deha bandham |   
Praasyaama dhanyaah khalu te manushyaah ye bhaarate na indriya vipra   
heenaah ||*** Various *karmaas* have been performed because of which we attain some *punya*, and because of this, we have come to *svarga* and are enjoying there. When this ends, we have to go back, but we don't know where we have to go, nobody knows which is the next *janma*, where we are going to be born, and as what. Those who are born in *Bhaarata Varsha*, as humans, they have the sense organs which are capable of performing *karma yoga*, *dhyaana yoga*, capable of meditating on *Vishnu*, they are the ones who are blessed. They praise the people who are born in this *Bhaarata Varsha*, that they are verily blessed.   
*Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***** *****Jaaneema iti | Na indriya vipra heenaah karma dhyaana aadi yugya patu   
karanaah |*** ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 27:   
Navavarsham tu maitreya jamboo dveepam idam mayaa |   
Laksha yojana vistaaram sankshepaat kathitam tava ||*** This *Jamboo Dveepa*, which is having an expanse of one lakh *yojanaas*, and consisting of nine continents, or regions, O *Maitreya*, I told you very briefly.   


*Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 3, Shloka 28:***** *****Jamboo dveepam samaavrutya laksha yojana vistarah |***** *****Maitreya valayaakaarah sthitah kshaarodadhih bahih ||*** Surrounding the *Jamboo Dveepa*, for an expanse of one lakh *yojanaas*, O *Maitreya*, there is an ocean of salt water, all around like a ring, outside the *Jamboo Dveepa*, surrounding all around. 



This concludes the Third Chapter of the Second *Amsha*. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Dviteeye Amshe Triteeyo Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Dviteeye Amshe   
Triteeyo Adhyaayah || ***



*** ***Page **35** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****   
|| Atha Chaturtho Adhyaayah ||   
Dveepaas surrounding Jamboo Dveepa and Pushkara Dveepa*** 



Now, the Fourth Chapter. *Sri Paraasharar* continues. ****
