+++
title = "04"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 1:***** *****Sri Paraasharah -***** *****Kshaarodena yathaa dveepo jamboo samjyo abhiveshtitah |***** *****Samveshtya kshaaram udadhim plakshadveepah tathaa sthitah ||*** Now, *Paraasharar* starts to explain to *Maitreya* about all the other *dveepaas* which are there around *Jamboo Dveepa*. Just like the island which is called *Jamboo Dveepa* is surrounded by the salt ocean, surrounding the salty ocean all around is the *Plaksha **Dveepa*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kshaarodena iti | Tathaa sthitah valayaakaaratvena sthitah |*** ***   


## 2
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 2:    
Jamboo dveepasya vistaarah shata saahasra sammitah |   
Sa eva dviguno brahman plaksha dveepa udaahrutah ||*** A hundred thousand *yojanaas* is the expanse of *Jamboo Dveepa*. Twice that is the expanse of *Plaksha Dveepa*. ***   


## 3
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 3:    
Sapta medhaatitheh putraah plaksha dveepeshvarasya vai |   
Jyeshthah shaantahayo naama shishirah tat anantarah ||*** *Medhatithi* is the lord of the *Plaksha Dveepa* and he has seven children. The eldest is *Shaantahaya*, and the next is *Shishira*. ***   


## 4
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 4:    
Sukhodayah tathaa aanandah shivah kshemaka eva cha |   
Dhruvah cha saptamah teshaam plaksha dveepeshvaraa hi te ||*** Next are *Sukhodaya, Aananda, Shiva, Kshemaka*. The seventh is *Dhruva*, and they are all kings of *Plaksha Dveepa*. ***   


## 5
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 5:    
Poorvam shaantahayam varsham shishiram cha sukham tathaa |   
Aanandam cha shivam cha eva kshemakam dhruvam eva cha ||*** The names of the countries are the same as the sons - *Shantahaya, Shishira, Aananda, *[[36]]   
*Shiva, Kshemaka, Dhruva*. ***   


## 6
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 6:    
Maryaadaakaarakaah teshaam tathaa anye varsha parvataah |   
Sapta eva teshaam naamaani shrunushva munisattama ||*** The names of the mountains forming the boundaries of these countries, they are also seven. O *Maitreyar*, listen to the names of those* varsha parvataas*. There are other *varsha parvataas* also. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 7:    
Gomedah cha eva chandrah cha naarado dundubhih tathaa |   
Somakah sumanaah cha eva vaibhraajah cha eva saptamah ||*** *Gomedha, Chandra, Naarada, Dundubhi, Somaka, Sumanaa, Vaibhraaja *- are the seven *varsha parvataas*. 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 8:    
Varshaachaleshu ramyeshu varshetveteshu cha anaghaah |   
Vasanti deva gandharva sahitaah satatam prajaah ||*** In these *varshaachalaas*, mountains forming the border, which are very pleasant and beautiful places, people who are very pure, live along with *devaas, gandharvaas*, etc. 





## 9
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 9:    
Teshu punyaa janapadaah chiraah cha mriyate janah |   
Naadhayo vyaadhayo vaapi sarva kaala sukham hi tat || ***People who are there don't get any diseases of the body or the mind. There are very virtuous people who are always engaged in good deeds. They live for a long time. Always they are having *sukha* only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Teshu iti | Chiraat pancha sahasra abdha ante | Tat plaksha dveepam | ***





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 10:    
Teshaam nadyah tu sapta eva varshaanaam cha samudragaah |   
Naamatah taah pravakshyaami shrutaah paapam haranti yaah || ***There are seven rivers there, and they go and reach the ocean. I will tell you the names of those rivers. By mere listening to the names of the rivers itself, you will get lot of good, one gets rid of all the sins. 





## 11
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 11:    
Anutaptaah shikhee cha eva vipaashaa tridivaa aaklamaa |   
Amrutaa sukrutaa cha eva saptaitaah tatra nimnagaah || ****Anutaptaa, Shikhee, Vipaashaa, Tridivaa, Aklamaa, Amrutaa, Sukrutaa* are the seven rivers. [[37]]   




***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Anutapta iti | Tridivaaklam iti paathah | Aklamaa tat aakhyaa panchamee   
nadee | ***The name of the fifth river is *Aklamaa*. 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 12:    
Ete shailaah tathaa nadyah pradhaanaah kathitaah tava |   
Kshudra shailaah tathaa nadyah tatra santi sahasrashah |   
Taah pibanti sadaa hrushtaa nadeerjanapadaah tu te ||*** I told you the prominent mountains and rivers which are there in that *Plaksha Dveepa*. There are thousands of other smaller rivers and mountains. The people who live there, drink the waters of those rivers, being very happy and living a peaceful life. 





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 13:    
Apasarpinee na teshaam vai na cha eva utsarpinee dvija |   
Na tu eva asti yuga avasthaa teshu sthaaneshu saptasu ||*** There is no deterioration or gradual improvement in the state of the people; they are always happy and peaceful. There is no division of *yugaas*, there is always good dharma present there. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Apasarpinee iti | Apasarpinee dvaapara aadi kalyantam prajaanaam avaroha   
kramaat hraasa avasthaa | Utsarpinee kruta aadi treta antam aaroha kramaat   
vruddhi avasthaa, \* utsarpinee yugaardham paschaat apasarpinee yugaardham   
cha iti aaryabhata ukteh | Yugaavasthaa dharma paada vyavasthaa | Teshu   
plaksha dveepasya varsheshu |*** The state of the people does on deteriorating, starting with *Dvaapara* by the end of *Kali yuga*. Starting with *Kruta*, till the end of *Treta yuga*, there is a gradual increase in the state of the people. These are all not there here. *Aaryabhata* has told that *Utsarpinee* is one half of the *yuga*, and *Aparsarpinee* is the other half of the *yuga*, this is of the *chaturyugaas*. In the countries of this *Plaksha Dveepa*, it is like this. 





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 14:    
Tretaayugasamah kaalah sarva daiva mahaa mate |   
Plaksha dveepa aadishu brahman shaaka dveepa antikeshu vai || ***All the time, it is as though it is in *Treta Yuga*. Whatever *dharmaas* are there in *Treta **Yuga*, it is present at all times. Starting with *Plaksha Dveepa* till *Shaaka Dveepa*, this is true. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Treta iti | Yugaadi krutyam tripaat dharmatvam satyaadimatvam cha [[38]]   
***tretaasaamyam | ***For *Treta yuga, dharma* stands in three legs. In *Kruta yuga*, it stands on all four legs. In *Dvaapara yuga*, it stands on two legs, and in *Kali yuga*, it stands on one leg. ***   


## 15
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 15:    
Pancha varsha sahasraani janaah jeevanti anaamayaah |   
Dharmaah pancha tathaa eteshu varna aashrama vibhaagashah ||*** People live for five thousand years without any difficulty or diseases. There is a clear distinction of the *varna aashrama dharmaas*. All the five *dharmaas* are well established - *ahimsaa, satya, asteya, brahmacharya, aparigraha*. 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 16:    
Varnaah cha tatra chatvaarah taan nibodha vadaami te || ***There are four *varnaas*, and I am going to tell you about that. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Varnaah tu iti | Tatra plaksha dveepe | ***





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 17:    
Aaryakaah kuraraah cha eva vidishyaa bhaavinascha te |   
Vipra kshatriya vaishyaah te shoodraah cha munisattama || ****Braahmanaas, kshatriyaas, vaishyaas, shoodraas* are there. There is a class called *Aaryakaas* who are *Brahmins*, a class called *Kuraraas* who are *Kshatriyaas*; there are *Vidishyaas* who are *Vaishyaas*, and then *Bhaavinaas*. 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 18:    
Jamboo vruksha pramaanah tu tat madhye sumaahaan taruh |   
Plakshah tat naama samjyo ayam plaksha dveepo dvijottama ||*** There is one huge tree in the middle of this *Plaksha Dveepa*, which is of the same size as *Jamboo Vruksha* which was told earlier. The name of that tree is *Plaksha*; that *dveepa* also has got that name because of that huge tree. 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 19:    
Ijyate tatra bhagavaan taih varnaih aaryakaadibhih |   
Somaroopee jagat srashtaa sarvah sarveshvaro harih || ***In that *Plaksha Dveepa, Bhagavaan Vishnu* is being worshipped by *Aaryaka* and all the people who are there, *Aaryaka* and others, through *yaagaas*. They worship *Vishnu* in the form of *Soma, Vishnu* who is none other than the creator of this world, who is everything, and who is Supreme Lord of all. 





## 20
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 20:    
Plaksha dveepa pramaanena plaksha dveepah samaavrutah |   
Tathaa eva ikshurasodena pariveshaanukaarinaa ||*** [[39]]   
Surrounding the *Plaksha Dveepa* and having the same measure as *Plaksha Dveepa*, is an ocean of sugarcane juice. 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 21:    
Iti evam tava maitreya plaksha dveepa udaahrutah |   
Samkshepena mayaa bhooyah shaalmalam me nishaamaya ||*** Thus, I have given you the description of *Plaksha Dveepa*. Now, I am going to tell you about the *Shaalmala Dveepa*. 





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 22:    
Shaalmalasya eeshvaro veero vapushmaan tat sutaan shrunu |   
Teshaam tu naama samjynyaani sapta varshaani taani vai ||*** The king of *Shaalmala* is a valiant king called *Vapushmaan*. I am going to tell you about his sons who are seven. the countries also have the same name as the sons. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 23:    
Shveto atha haritah cha eva jeemooto rohitah tathaa |   
Vaidyuto maanasah cha eva suprabhah cha mahaamune ||*** *Shveta, Harita, Jeemoota, Rohita, Vaidyuta, Maanasa, Suprabha* are the seven sons. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 24:    
Shaalmalena samudro asou dveepena ikshu rasa udakah |   
Vistaara dvigunenaatha sarvatah samvrutah sthitah || ***This ocean of sugarcane juice is surrounded by *Shaalmala Dveepa*, and the expanse of *Shaalmala Dveepa* is twice that of the ocean, and it is present all around. 





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 25:    
Tatra api parvataah sapta vijnyeyaa ratna yonayah |   
Varshaabhi vyanjakaa ye tu tathaa sapta cha nimnagaah ||*** There also, there are seven mountains, which are the source of gems, and they divide the countries. There are also seven rivers in the same way. 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 26:    
Kumudah cha unnatah cha eva triteeyah cha balaahakah |   
Drono yatra mahoushadhyah sa chaturtho maheedharah || ****Kumuda, Unnata*, and the third one is *Balaahaka*. Fourth one is *Drona*, where there are some great medicines. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kumudah cha iti | Mahoushadhyah mruta sanjeevana aadyaah | Ayam   
dronaadrih hanumataa aaneetaah |*** *Mruta sanjeevina* and other herbal plants are there. *Dronaadri* was brought by *Hanumaan*. [[40]]   






## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 27:    
Kankah tu panchamah shashto mahishah saptamah tathaa |   
Kakudmaan parvata varah sarit naamaani me shrunu ||*** Fifth one is *Kanka*. Sixth is *Mahisha*. The seventh one is the sacred mountain called *Kakudmaan*. Now, I am going to tell you the names of the rivers. Listen to me. 





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 28:    
Yonih toyaa vitrushnaa cha chandraa muktaa vimochanee |   
Nivruttih saptamee taasaam smrutaah taah paapa shaantidaah ||*** If one remembers these rivers, all the sins get destroyed. They are called *Yoni, **Toyaa, Vitrushnaa, Chandraa, Muktaa, Vimochanee, Nivrutti*. These are sacred and holy rivers. 





## 29
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 29:    
Shvetam cha haritam cha eva vaidyutam maanasam tathaa |   
Jeemootam rohitam cha eva suprabham cha atishobhanam |   
Sapta etaani tu varshaani chaaturvarnyaayutaani vai ||*** There are also seven countries, *Shveta, Harita, Vaidyuta, Maanasa, Jeemoota, **Rohita*, and *Suprabha* which is very pleasant. Here, the four *varnaas* are well established. 





## 30
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 30:    
Shaalmale ye tu varnaah cha vasanti ete mahaamune |   
Kapilaah cha arunaah peetaah krushnaah cha eva pruthak pruthak || ***There live the people of four *varnaas - Kapilaas, Arunaas, Peetaas* and *Krushnaas*. These are the names of people who belong to the four classes of *Braahmanaas, **Kshatriyaas, Vaishyaas, Shoodraas*. 





## 31
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 31:    
Braahmanaah kshatriyaah vaishyaah shoodraah cha eva yajanti tam |   
Bhagavantam samah tasya vishnum aatmaanam avyayam |   
Vaayubhootam makhah shreshthaih yajvano yajnya samsthitim || ***These four classes do *upaasanaa* of *Bhagavaan*, through *yaagaas*, and *Bhagavaan* who is the inner controller of everything, immutable - they worship in the form of *Vaayu*; they worship in the form of *yaagaas*. 





## 32
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 32:    
Devaanaam atra saannidhyam ateeva sumanohare |   
Shaalmaleeh sumahaan vruksho naamnaa nirvruti kaarakah || ***Here, in this most beautiful place, *dveepa, Shaalmalee*, all the *devaas* are present all the time. There is a huge tree called *Shaalmalee*, all the time it gives a lot of happiness. [[41]]   






## 33
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 33:    
Esha dveepah samudrena surodena samaavrutah |   
Vistaaraat shaalmalasya eva samena tu samantatah ||*** This *Shaalmala dveepa* is surrounded by ocean of wine. The expanse of that ocean is equal to that of the *Shaalmala Dveepa*, and it is present all around. 





## 34
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 34:    
Surodakah parivrutah kusha dveepena sarvatah |   
Shaalmalasya tu vistaaraat dvigunena samantatah ||*** This ocean of wine is surrounded by *Kusha Dveepa*. Expanse of *Kusha Dveepa* is twice that of *Shaalmala Dveepa*. 





## 35
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 35:    
Jyotishmatah kusha dveepe sapta putraan shrunushva taan ||*** The king of *Kusha Dveepa* is *Jyotishmaan*, who has seven sons. I will tell you their names. 





## 36
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 36:    
Udbhido venumaan cha eva vairatho lambano dhrutih |   
Prabhaakaro atha kapilah tat naamaa varsha paddhatih || ***They are *Udbhida, Venumaan, Vairatha, Lambana, Dhruti, Prabhaakara, Kapila*. All the countries are named after them only. 





## 37
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 37:    
Tasmin vasanti manujaah saha daiteya daanavaih |   
Tathaa eva deva gandharva yaksha kimpurusha aadayah || ***There, humans live along with *Daiteyaas* and *Daanavaas. Devaas, Gandharvaas, **Yakshaas, Kimpurushaas*, all of them live there. 





## 38
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 38:    
Varnaah tatra api chatvaaro nija anushtaana tat paraah |   
Daminah shushminah snehaah mandehaah cha mahaa mune ||*** There also the four *varnaas* are present, and they are all the time established in performing their *nitya naimittika karmaas*. They are called *Damina, Shushmina, **Sneha, Mandehaa*. 





## 39
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 39:    
Braahmanaah kshatriyaah vaishyaah shoodraah cha anukrama uditaah || ***They are the classes of *Braahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shoodra*. 





## 40
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 40:    
Yathaa ukta karma kartrutvaat sva ashikaara kshayaaya te | [[42]]   
***Tatra eva tvam kusha dveepe brahma roopam janaardanam |   
Yajantah kshapayanti ugram adhikaaram phala pradam || ***Here, all the four classes of people are engaged in ordained daily and occasional duties. They have to dispense the *Praarabdha karma* by experiencing it; so they perform the *karmaas* by performing their *varna aashrama dharmaas*, and exhaust this *praarabdha karma*, and then attain *moksha*. They worship *Mahaa Vishnu **Janaardana*, who is in the form of *Brahma*. They exhaust all the *karmaas* which give fruits, by performing their duties. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yathaa ukta iti | Yathaa uktam karma nityam naimittikam cha | Sva adhikaara   
kshayaaya cha svasya aatma jnyaanena karmani adhikaaram vihita kainkaryam   
nivartayitum | Adhikaaram praak janmajam karma | ***





## 41
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 41:    
Vidrumo hemashailah cha hyutimaan pushapavaan tathaa |   
Kusheshayo harih cha eva saptamo mandaraachalah || ***In this *Kusha Dveepa*, there are seven *varshaachalaas*, mountains which are forming borders of the countries; they are called *Vidruma, Hemashaila, Hyutimaa, **Pushpavaan, Kusheshaya, Hari, Mandaraachala*. 





## 42
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 42:    
Varshaachalaah tu sapta ete tatra dveepe mahaa mune |   
Nadyah cha sapta taasaam tu shrunu naamaani anukramaat || ***There are also seven rivers, I am going to tell your their names in order. 





## 43
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 43:    
Dhootapaapaa shivaa cha eva pavitraa sammatih tathaa |   
Vidyudambhaa mahee cha anyaa sarva paapa haraah tu imaah || ***Through these rivers, one can get rid of all their sins, these are very holy rivers. They are *Dhootapaapaa, Shivaa, Pavitraa, Sammati, Vidyut, Ambhaa, Mahee. * 





## 44
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 44:    
Anyaah sahasrashah tatra kshudra nadyah tathaa achalaah |   
Kusha dveepe kushastambah samjyayaa tasya tat smrutam || ***There are other thousands of smaller rivers and mountains there. There is a *Kusha **Stambha*, a tuft of *Kusha, Darbhaa* grass. Because of that only, the *dveepa* has got that name. 





## 45
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 45:    
Tat pramaanena sa dveepo ghrutodena samaavrutah |   
Ghrutodah cha samudro vai krouncha dveepena samvrutah || ***This *Kusha Dveepa* is surrounded by ocean of ghee, which is also having same expanse [[43]]   
as that of *Kusha Dveepa*. This ocean of ghee is surrounded by *Krouncha Dveepa*. 





## 46
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 46:    
Krouncha dveepo mahaabhaaga shrooyataam cha aparo mahaan |   
Kusha dveepasya vistaaraat dviguno yasya vistarah || ***I am going to describe this great *Krouncha Dveepa* to you. Each *dveepa* is twice the size of the one which it is surrounding. *Krouncha Dveepa* is twice that of *Kusha **Dveepa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Krouncha dveepa iti | Krouncha dveepe girih krounchah tasya naamnaa sa   
uchyate \* iti maatsye | ***





## 47
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 47:    
Krouncha dveepe dyutimatah putraah tasya mahaatmanah |   
Tat naamaani cha varshaani teshaam chakre maheepatih || ****Dyutimaan's* seven sons are there in *Krouncha Dveepa*. They are named the same as the countries. 





## 48
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 48:    
Kushalo mallagah cha ushnah peevaro atha andhakaarakah |   
Munih cha dundubhih cha eva sapta ete tat sutaa mune || ***The seven sons are *Kushala, Mallaga, Ushna, Peevara, Andhakaaraka, Muni, **Dundubhi*. 





## 49
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 49:    
Tatra api deva gandharva sevitaah sumanoharaah |   
Varshaachalaa mahaa buddhe teshaam naamaani me shrunu ||*** There are also many *varshaachalaas* which are very pleasant, where *devaas* and *gandharvaas* live. I am going to tell you their names. 





## 50
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 50:    
Krounchah cha vaamanah cha eva triteeyah cha andhakaarakah |   
Chaturtho ratna shailah cha svaahinee haya sannibhah ||*** They are called *Krouncha, Vaamana*, third is *Andhakaarakaa*, fourth is *Svaahinee* where gems are found and is of the form of a horse. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Krouncha cha iti | Svaahinee haya sannibhah badabaamukhaabah | ***





## 51
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 51:    
Divaavrut panchamah cha atra tathaa anyah pundareekavaan |   
Dundubhih cha mahaa shailo dvigunaah te parasparam | [[44]]   
***Dveepaa dveepeshu ye shailaa yathaa dveepeshu te tathaa ||*** Fifth one is *Divaavrut*, next one is *Pundareekavaan, Dundubhi* is another big mountain. Each one is twice the size of the other, in order. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Divaavrut iti | Dviguna ityaadi | Ye dveepaah dveepeshu sthitaah ye cha   
shailaah te parasparam uttarottaram dvigunaah poorvapoorvadveepebhyah   
uttarottara dveepaah dviguna vistaaraah, evam poorva poorva dveepa   
shailebhyah uttarottara dveepa shailaah dviguna vistaaraah | Yathaa dveepeshu   
tathaa iti | Dveepeshu yathaa yaavat maanam tathaa taavat maanaah te   
shailaah iti arthah | \(Adya ayam arthah\) Etat uktam bhavati - laksha   
samkhyaam iti jamboo dveepe sthitaah shailaah dvi sahasra vistaaraah   
ubhayato abdhi sprushah, dvi lakshaadimite plakshaadou chatuh sahasra aadi   
vistaaraah abhito abdhisprusha iti | ***All the *dveepaas*, and the mountains which are present in the *dveepaas *- the earlier mountains which were told - the later ones are twice the size of the earlier ones. Each one is twice of the previous one. Similarly for the mountains also. Those mountains which are present in the later *dveepa* are twice the size of those present in the earlier *dveepa*. One lakh *yojanaas* is the expanse of *Jamboo Dveepa*; the mountains which are there are two thousand *yojanaas*, and on either side, they are touching the ocean. Two lakh *yojanaas* is the expanse of *Plaksha Dveepa*, four thousand *yojanaas* is the expanse of the mountains, all around they are touching the ocean. 





## 52
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 52:    
Varsheshu eteshu ramyeshu tathaa shaila vareshu cha |   
Nivasanti niraatankaah saha deva ganaih prajaah || ***In all these sacred and pleasant places and mountains, people live along with the groups of *devaas*, without any fear. 





## 53
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 53:    
Pushkaraah pushkalaah dhanyaah tishyaakhyaah cha mahaa mune |   
Braahmanaah kshatriyaah vaishyaah shoodraah cha anukrama uditaah ||*** *Pushkaraas, Pushkalaas, Dhanyaas* and *Tishyaas* are the names of the people who are *Braahmanaas, Kshatriyaas, Vaishyaas* and *Shoodraas*, in order. 





## 54
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 54:    
Nadeeh maitreya te tatra yaah pibanti shrunushva taah |   
Sapta pradhaanaah shatashah tathaa anyaah kshudra nimnagaah ||*** I will tell you about the rivers which are there, whose waters are drunk by these people. There are seven important ones, and there are hundreds of smaller ones. 





## 55
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 55:  [[45]]   
***Gowree kumudvatee cha eva sandhyaa raatrih manojavaa |   
Kshaantih cha pundareekaa cha sapta etaa varsha nimnagaah || ****Gowree, Kumudvatee, Sandhyaa, Raatree, Manojavaa, Kshaanti, Pundraeekaa* are the rivers. 





## 56
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 56:    
Tatra api vishnuh bhagavaan pushkaraadyaih janaardanah |   
Yaagaih rudra svaroopah cha ijyate yajnya sannidhou || ***Here, *Mahaavishnu* is worshipped in the form of *Rudra* by these people *Pushkaraas, **Pushkalaas, Dhanyaas* and *Tishyaas*. They worship Him through *yaagaas*. 





## 57
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 57:    
Krouncha dveepah samudrena dadhimandodakena cha |   
Aavrutah sarvatah krouncha dveepa tulyena maanatah || ****Krouncha Dveepa* is surrounded by *Dadhimandodaka*, the essence of curd. The ocean is made of essence of curd. This is of the same expanse as *Krouncha Dveepa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Krouncha dveepa iti | Dadhimandodaka dadhno mandah saarah, sa eva udakam   
yasya tena | ***





## 58
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 58:    
Dadhimandodakah cha api shaakadveepena samvrutah |   
Krouncha dveepasya vistaaraat dvigunena mahaa mune || ***This ocean of *Dadhimanda* is surrounded by *Shaaka Dveepa*. Its expanse is twice as that of *Krouncha Dveepa*. 





## 59
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 59:    
Shaaka dveepeshvarasya api bhavyasya sumahaatmanah |   
Sapta eva tanayaah teshaam dadou varshaani sapta sah ||*** *Shaaka Dveepa's* king is *Bhavya*, very respected and excellent person, he had seven sons, and he gave the names of the countries also the same name. 





## 60
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 60:    
Jaladah cha kumaarah cha sukumaaro mareechakah |   
Kusumaadah cha moudaakih saptamah cha mahaadrumah || ***They are *Jalada, Kumaara, Sukumaara, Mareechaka, Kusumaada, Moudaaki*, seventh is *Mahaadruma*. 





## 61
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 61:    
Tat sanjnyaani eva tatra api sapta varshaani anukramaat |   
Tatra api parvataah sapta varsha viccheda kaarinah ||*** The countries are having the same name. Here also, seven mountains are there, which [[46]]   
separate these seven countries. 





## 62
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 62:    
Poorvah tatra udayagirih jalaadhaarah tathaa aparah |   
Tathaa raivatakah shyaamah tathaa eva aastagirih dvija |   
Aambikeyah tathaa ramyah kesaree parvatottamah || ***In the east, first, it is *Udayagiri*, after that is *Jalaadhaara*. Then *Raivataka, Shyaama, **Astagiri, Aambikeya, Kesari*. The seventh one *Kesari* is very pleasant and excellent. 





## 63
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 63:    
Shaakah tatra mahaa vrukshah siddha gandharva sevitah |   
Yatpatravaata samsparshaat aahlaado jaayate parah ||*** There is a huge tree called *Shaaka* tree, which is used by the *Siddhaas, Gandharvaas*, etc. Taking in the fragrance of the leaves of this tree, causes a lot of pleasant feeling and joy to people who are living around that. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shaaka iti | Khara mrudu sparsha ubhaya paarshva parno vruksha visheshah   
shaakhah |*** It has leaves which are rough on one side, and soft on the other. 





## 64
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 64:    
Tatra punyaah janapadaah chaaturvarnya samanvitaah |   
Nadyah cha atra mahaa punyaah sarva paapa bhayaapahaah || ***There are people who are very virtuous, the four *varnaas* are established there, very holy and sacred; they can get rid of all their sins, and fear of sins will never touch one who lives near the waters. 





## 65
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 65:    
Sukumaaree kumaaree cha nalinee dhenukaa cha yaa |   
Ikshu cha venuka cha eva gabhastih saptamee tathaa ||*** The names of those rivers are *Sukumaaree, Kumaaree, Nalinee, Dhenukaa, Ikshu, **Venukaa, Gabhasti*. 





## 66
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 66:    
Anyaah cha shatashah tatra kshudra nadyo mahaa mune |   
Maheedharaah tathaa santi shatasho atha sahasrashah ||*** There are other thousands of smaller rivers, and mountains. 





## 67
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 67:    
Taam pibanti mudaa yuktaa jalaadaadishu ye sthitaah |   
Varsheshu te janapadaah svargaat abhyetya medineem || ***Those who live there very happily, drinking the waters of these rivers, coming from [[47]]   
the heavens to this earth, after exhausting the *punyaas* in *svarga*, they drink the waters. Coming from the heavens to the earth, they use the waters of these rivers, and it is a very sacred place. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Taah pibanti iti | Svarga prada karma kshaye tat sheshaat bhuvam abhyetya   
jaladaadi varsheshu ye sthitaah jaataah, jaanapadaa janaah te taah nadeeh   
pibanti | ***Those who, after exhausting the *karmaas* of the *svarga*, after enjoying the stay in *svarga*, they come back and live there, in countries called *Jalada* and others, they consume the waters of these rivers. Those who, after exhausting the *karmaas* of the *svarga*, after enjoying the stay in *svarga*, they come back and live there, in countries called *Jalada* and others, they consume the waters of these rivers. 



The greatness of people living in *Shaaka Dveepa* is further continued. 



We are seeing the descriptions of the *Plaksha Dveepa* and other *dveepaas* are told by *Sri Paraasharar*, after telling about *Jamboo Dveepa*. Now, *Paraasharar* is telling about *Shaaka Dveepa*, where there are seven great rivers which are very holy and sacred, and one gets rid of all fear and sins by taking a dip in these rivers or by drinking those waters. There are also hundreds of smaller rivers, and hundreds and thousands of smaller mountains, 





## 68
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 68:    
Dharma haanih na teshu asti na sangharshah parasparam |   
Maryaadaavyutkramo na api teshu desheshu saptashu ||*** There is no decline in the *dharma* there; all the time, the people follow *dharma*. They don't fight against each other. Nobody goes beyond their limits, in all these seven countries. 





## 69
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 69:    
Vangaah cha maagadhaah cha eva maanasaa mandagaah tathaa |   
Vangaa braahmana bhooyishthaa maagadhaah kshatriyaah tathaa |   
Vaishyaah tu maanasaah teshaam shoodraah teshaam tu mandagaah || ***There, *Vangaas, Maagadhaas, Maanasaas, Mandagaas* live there. *Vangaas* are predominantly *Braahmanaas. Maagadhaas* are *Kshatriyaas. Maanasaas* are *Vaishyaas. **Mandagaas* are *Shoodraas*. ***   


## 70
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 70:  [[48]]   
***Shaakadveepe tu taih vishnuh sooryaroopa dharo mune |   
Yathaa uktaih ijyate samyak karmabhih niyataatmabhih ||*** *Vishnu* is worshipped in *Shaaka Dveepa*, in the form of *Soorya*. All the people worship Vishnu in the form of *Soorya*, with proper *karmaas*, as told in the *Shaastraas*, and as per their *varna aashrama dharmaas*. 





## 71
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 71:    
Shaaka dveepah tu maitreya ksheerodena samaavrutah |   
Shaaka dveepa pramaanena valayena eva veshtitah ||*** *Shaaka dveepa* is surrounded by milky ocean. Its expanse is as much as that of the *Shaaka Dveepa* itself. 





## 72
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 72:    
Ksheerabdhih sarvato brahman pushkaraakheyana veshtitah |   
Dveepena shaaka dveepaatta dvigunena samantatah ||*** This milky ocean is surrounded by *Pushkara Dveepa* and it is twice the size of *Shaaka **Dveepa*. 





## 73
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 73:    
Pushkare savanasya api mahaapeeto abhavat sutah |   
Dhaatakih cha tayoh tatra dve varshe naama chinhite |   
Mahaapeetam tathaa eva anyat dhaatakeekhanda samhitam ||*** *Pushkara Dveepa* was ruled over by *Savana* and he had two sons, *Mahaapeeta* and *Dhaataki*. The countries were also named after them. One is called *Mahaapeeta* and the second one is called *Dhaataki Khanda*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Pushkara iti | Dhaatakee khandam iti cha tasya eva raajnyo naama | ***The king's name is also *Dhaataki*. 





## 74
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 74:    
Ekah cha atra mahaabhaaga prakhyaato varsha parvatah |   
Maanasottara samjnyo vai madhyato valayaakrutih || ***There is only one mountain in that *Pushkara Dveepa*, it is the *Varsha Parvata*, the mountain which forms the boundary of the country. *Maanasottara* is the name of that mountain. It is circular and it is in the centre. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ekah cha iti | Pushkare maanasottara adreh valayaakaratva uktayaa   
plakshaadishu varshaadraya stiryagrekhaakaaraa amito abdhi sprusho varsha   
vibhedina iti gamyate | ***In *Pushkara Dveepa, Maanasottara* mountain is said to be circular. In *Plaksha* and other places, mountains forming the boundary are horizontally located, they are [[49]]   
touching the ocean all around, and they also separate out the countries. 





## 75
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 75:    
Yojanaanaam sahasraani oordhvam panchaashat ucchritah |   
Taavat eva cha visteernah sarvatah parimandalah ||*** The height of the mountain is fifty thousand *yojanaas*, and the expanse is also the same. It is all around. 





## 76
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 76:    
Pushkara dveepa valayam madhyena vibhajan iva |   
Sthito asou tena vicchinnam jaatam tat varshakadvayam ||*** It is as though dividing the *Pushkara Dveepa* into two in the centre, forming the boundary. Because of this, there are two parts - both of which are circular. 





## 77
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 77:    
Valayaakaaram ekaikam tayoh varsham tathaa girih || ***Each one is circular only - the countries and the mountains. 





## 78
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 78:    
Dasha varsha sahasraani tatra jeevanti maanavaah |   
Niraamayaa vishokaah cha raaga dvesha aadi varjitaah || ***People who live there in the *Pushkara Dveepa*, live for ten thousand years. Without any diseases, or grief, they don't have desire and hatred. 





## 79
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 79:    
Adhamo uttamou na teshu aastaam na vadhya vadhakou dvija |   
Na eershya asooyaa bhayam dvesho rosho lobhaadiko na cha || ***There is no distinction as inferior or superior. There is no killer or killed. They don't have jealousy, finding of faults in others, fear, hatred, rage, miserliness. 





## 80
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 80:    
Mahaapeetam bahivarsham dhaatakeekhandamantatah |   
Maanasottara shailasya deva daitya aadi sevitam || ***Outside of the *Maanasottara* mountain is the *Mahaapeeta* country, and inside is the *Dhaataki Khanda*. All the *devaas* and *daityaas* come and live there. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Mahaapeetam iti | Antatah maanasottara adreh anta iti arthah | Dhaatakee   
samjnyam antata iti cha paathah | ***





## 81
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 81:    
Satya anrute na tatra aastaam dveepe pushkara samjnite |   
Na tatra nadyah shailaa vaa dveepe varsha dvaya anvite || [[50]]   
There is no *satya* or *anruta* in the *dveepa* called by name *Pushkara*. In this *Pushkara **Dveepa*, there are no other small rivers, or no other small mountains. 





## 82
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 82:    
Tulyaveshaah tu manujaa devaih tatra eka roopinah ||*** People who live there look exactly like gods. 





## 83
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 83:    
Varna aashram aachaara heenam dharma aacharana varjitam |   
Trayee vaartaa danda neetih shushrooshaa rahitam cha yat || ***There is no *varna aashrama aachaara. Dharma aacharana* is not there. Three *vedaas* are not there. *Vaanijya, Raaja Neeti*, service - are not existing here. 



This means that everyone knows their *varna aashrama dharmaas*, and there is no need to enforce. 





## 84
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 84:    
Varsha dvayam tu maitreya bhoumah svargo ayam uttamah |   
Sarvartu sukhadah kaalo jaraa roga aadi varjitah |   
Dhaatakee khandha samjnye atha mahaa peete cha vai mune ||*** These two countries - *Mahaapeeta* and *Dhaataki Khanda*, O *Maitreya*, is an excellent heaven on earth. It is pleasant in all the seasons; there is no old age or disease. 





## 85
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 85:    
Nyagrodhah pushkara dveepe brahmanah sthaanam uttamam |   
Tasmin nivasati brahmaa poojyamaanah suraa asuraih || ***In this *Pushkara Dveepa*, there is a place called *Nyagrodha*, and it is the place of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, being worshipped by gods and demons. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Nyagrodhah iti | Asya nyagrodhasya pushkara iti naama | Tena dveepo api   
pushkara iti smaryate | \* Nyagrodhah pushkara dveepe puskharah tena sa   
smrutah \* iti maatsya ukteh | Pushkarah pushkala iti arthah |*** This *Nyagrodha* itself is called *Pushkara*. Because of that, this *dveepa* is also known as *Pushkara*. In *Matsya Puraana*, it is told that there is a place called *Nyagrodha* in *Pushkara Dveepa*, and that is why it is called *Pushkara* itself. It has abundance. 





## 86
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 86:    
Svaadoodakena udadadhinaa pushkarah pariveshtitah |   
Samena pushkarasya eva vistaaraat mandalaakruteh ||*** *Pushkara Dveepa* is surrounded all around by the ocean of sweet water. The size of that ocean is as much as that of *Pushkara*. It is all around. [[51]]   






## 87
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 87:    
Evam dveepaah samudraih cha sapta saptabhih aavrutaah |   
Dveepah cha eva samudrah cha samaanou dvigunou parou ||*** All the *dveepaas* and *samudraas* which were told, *Jamboo, Plaksha, Shaalmala, **Kusha, Krouncha, Shaaka, Puskhara*, are surrounded by seven oceans; and the *dveepa* and *samudra *- each pair has the same expanse, and the immediate next one is twice that of the previous one. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Evam iti | Dveepah cha eva samudrah cha jamboo dveepa kshaarodou samaanou,   
tat dvigunou plaksha dveepe ikshurasodou | Evam anantara dveepa abdhayoh   
poorvapoorva dveepadvaigunyam anyonya saamyam cha oohyam | ****Jamboo Dveepa* and the ocean of salt water, are of the same size. *Plaksha **Dveepa* and the sugarcane juice ocean, are twice that of *Jamboo Dveepa*. A *dveepa* and its *samudra* are of the same size, but double the size of the one before that. 





## 88
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 88:    
Payaamsi sarvadaa sarva samudreshu samaani vai |   
Nyoona atiriktataa teshaam kadaachit na eva jaayate || ***In all these oceans, the quantity of water is always same. It does not increase or reduce in quantity at any point of time. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Payaamsi iti | Payaamsi samaani avruddhi shoshaani | Chandrasya tu vruddhou   
pournimaayaam udaye cha teshaam utkshobha maatram na tu vruddhih | Evam   
chandra hraase taavat kshubhitasya hraasah na tat moola ambu kshayah | ***It does not increase or does not get dried up. When the moon is in ascendance, and also when the *Pournami* comes, the ocean is seen to increase, because there is a lot of turbulence; here there is only turbulence, and it does not increase in quantity. In the *Krishna Paksha*, when the moon is on the decreasing phase, the turbulence reduces and there is no reduction in the quantity of water. 





## 89
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 89:    
Sthaaleeshtam agni samyogaat udreki salilam yathaa |   
Tathaa induvruddou salilam ambodhou munisattama ||*** In a vessel, a water that is heated expands; in the same way, when the moon is in ascendance in the *Shukla Paksha*, waters in the ocean also seem to increase. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sthaaleestham iti | Yathaa parimitam jalam kvaathe udrichyate tat eva shaitye   
hrasati samee bhavati | [[52]]   
When it is heated, it expands, and it comes down when cooled. 





## 90
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 90:    
Anyoonaa na atiriktaa cha varshanti aapo hasanti cha |   
Udayaasta mayeshvindoh pakshayoh shukla krushnayoh || ***Though it is seen to increase and decrease, the quantity of water does not change. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Anyoonaa na atiriktaa iti | Tathaa shukle krushne vaa chandrasya udaye apaam   
sapaada ekavimshati hastamitaa vruddhih | Astamaye taavaan eva hraasah | ***The extent of increase in the waters is told - *hasta* is a measure which is 24 inches, this is 21.25 *hastaas*. 





## 91
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 91:    
Dasha uttaraani pancha eva hi angulaanaam shataani vai |   
Apaam vruddhikshayou drushtou saamudreenaam mahaa mune ||*** The increase or decrease that is seen is 510 inches. 





## 92
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 92:    
Bhojanam pushkara dveepe tatra svayam upasthitam |   
Shat rasam bhunjate vipra prajaah sarvaah sadaa eva hi || ***In this *Pushkara Dveepa*, food is present by itself, it is automatically available to people. They enjoy the six kinds of delicacies, all the time. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bhojanam iti | Shat rasam bhakshya bhojya lehya choshya peya khaadya   
aatmanaa shat vidham rasyam, madhura aamla lavana tikta katu kashaayaakhya   
rasavat dravyam vaa | ***Different kinds of food are those which are eaten, drunk, licked, etc. or with different tastes, sweet, hot, etc. 





## 93
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 93:    
Svaadoodakasya parito drushyate loka samsthitih |   
Dvigunaa kaanchanee bhoomih sarva jantu vivarjitaa || ***Surrounding this sweet water ocean, there is this land of gold, which is twice that of *Pushkara Dveepa*. Nobody lives there. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Svaadoodakasya iti | Lokasya jana nivaasa bhootasya sapta dveepa   
aatmakasya, samsthitih maryaadaa bhoota svarna bhoomih | Aloka samsthitih   
iti padacchede loka samsthaana rahitaa darpana aakaaraa | Saa cha lokaan   
meroh amitah sthitaat sapta laksha pancha koti mitaat dvigunaa sa chaturdasha   
laksha dasha kotih |*** [[53]]   
In the seven *dveepaas* which were told, people live there, and at the end of these seven islands, is *Svarna Bhoomi*, the land made of gold. There is a *paathaantara, **aloka samsthitih*, which says that there is no division of land, and nobody live there. From *Meru parvata*, including all the seven islands and oceans, the measure is five crores and seven lakhs; this is twice the size of that, which is ten crores and fourteen lakhs, gold land. 





## 94
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 94:    
Lokaalokah tatah shailo yojanaa aayuta vistrutah |   
Uchraayena api taavanti sahasraani achalo hi sah ||*** After that, there is a mountain called *Lokaaloka*, which is ten thousand *yojanaas* in size. The height of this is also ten thousand *yojanaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Lokaaloka iti | Tato loka alokaadrih | Evam samhatya meroh ekato loka   
alokaantam kotyo dvaadasha lakshaani sapta shashtih, panchaashat sahasraani   
cha | \* Etena hi aloka parimaanam vyaakhyaatam iti bhaagavata uktayaa   
kinchit oona sardha dvaadasha kotiaadikam alokaakhyam | ***After the gold land, there is *Lokaaloka* mountain. From one part of the *Meru* mountain till the *Lokaaloka* mountain, it is 12 crores, 67 lakhs, 50 thousand *yojanaas*. In *Bhaagavata*, the measure of *Aloka* is also told - as a little less than 12.5 crores. 





## 95
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 95:    
Tatah tamah samaavrutya tam shailam sarvatah sthitam |   
Tamah cha anda kataahena samantaat pariveshtitam |*** Surrounding this *Lokaaloka* mountain is *tamas*, completely filled with darkness. This *tamo loka* is surrounded all around by *Andakataaha*, the cosmic shell. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tata iti | Tatra eva tamomartodou cha taamasa bhoota aavaasa bhootou |   
Sagartodaat tamasah parastaat paritah prati disham anda kataahaat arvaak   
mahaapurusha nivaasa bhoote vaikuntha lokah, tatah kataaha iti jnyeyam |   
Bhaagavate harivamshe cha braahmana putra aanayana prastaave bhagavat   
sthaanasya tathaa upavarnitatvaat |*** In the *Taamasa loka* told, there is a huge pit of water all around. With the pit and *Tamo loka* included, all around, outside of the *Andakataaha*, there is *Vaikuntha **Loka* where *Vishnu* lives. After that is the *Kataaha*, is what is told. In *Bhaagavatha* and *Harivamsha*, there is a story where *Krishna* goes and brings the son \(who had already died\) of a *Braahmana*, He is said to have gone to *Paramapada, **Vishnu Loka* and brought him back; this is the *Vishnu Loka*. 



It is said that those who go to *Paramapada* do not come back. But there is also [[54]]   
another view that those who go through *Archiraadi Maarga* only, they do not come back. If they go in some other *maarga*, they may come back. 





## 96
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 96:    
Panchaashat koti vistaaraa seyam urvee mahaa mune |   
Sahaiva anda kataahena sadveepa abdhi maheedharaa ||*** Thus, the expanse of this whole earth is 50 crores *yojanaas*. Including the *Andakataaha*, the *Dveepaas* and mountains. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Panchaashat iti | Evam meroh ekatah kataaha antam panchavimshati kotikam   
bhoo vistaara ardham, anyathah cha tathaa, ittham samhatya panchaashat koti   
bhoo vistaarah | Evam oordhva adhah kataaha avadhih cha anda ucchraayah   
panchaashat kotih, \* Soorya anda golayoh madhye kotyah syuh pancha vimshatih   
\* iti shuka ukteh | Yat vaa, ekata eva loka maanaat sasaardha   
trilakshaadyardha dvi koti aatmakaat vaigunyam kaancha bhoomeh sa sapta   
laksha pancha koti aatmakam krutvaa shishtam sapta dasha koti adikam tamah   
kataaha aadi maanatvena yojyam | Puraana kaarasya hi vairaagya utpaadane   
bhagavat maahaatmya jnyaapane cha taatparyaat na loka samkhyaa ganiteshu   
ati aadarah | Tato yathaa kathanchit api panchaashat koti vistaaratvam bhuvo   
jnyeyam | Anye tu vistaara shabdam vyaasa ardhaparam krutvaa meroh abhitah   
panchaashat kotitvam varnayanto bhoomeh shata koti vistaaratvam praahuh |   
Tathaa cha vaaraahe \* Bhoomandalam tu shata koti vistaaram sa anda   
kataaham iti | Ayam eva pakshah skaande shiva rahasye vistarena uktah |   
Shaiva tantra antare cha \* Koti dvayam tri panchaashat lakshaani cha tatah   
param | Panchaashat cha sahasraani sapta dveepaah sa saagaraah || Tato   
hiranmayee bhoomih dasha kotyo varaanane || Devaanaam kreedanaarthaaya   
loka alokah tatah param || Parvato valayaakaaro yojanaayuta vistrutah ||   
Tasmaat baahyam tamo ghoram dushprekshyam jeeva varjitam ||   
Panchatrimshat smrutaa kotyo lakshaani ekona vimshatih || Chatvaarimshat   
sahasraani yojanaanaam varaanane | Sapta saagara maanah tu gartodah tat   
anantaram | Koti yojana maanah tu kataahah sa vyavasthitah || iti | Asmin tu   
pakshe \* Soorya anda golayoh madhye kotyah syuh pancha vimshatih iti   
bhaagavata shlokastha soorya shabdah tat prakaashya deshaparo yojyah | \*   
Ravi chandramasoryaavat mayookhiah avabhaasyate || Sa samudra sarit   
shailaa taavatee pruthivee smrutaa || iti vakshyamaanatvaat | \* Prakaashya   
pruthiveemaanam pancha vimshati kotikam, tat prakaashakam eva sooryam   
kalpayitvaa, tatah param yaavat anda kataaham pancha vimshati iti eva arthah   
| Yat vaa anda kataaha antah panchaashat kotih pruthivee, bahih cha   
aavaranabhootaa taavatee iti, evam shata kotitvam varaaha puraana   
anusaaraat yojyam | Yat vaa shaastreeya angula siddhaih yojanaih panchaashat   
kotya eva loukika angula siddha yojanaih shata kotyah syuh | Yat vaa kalpa   
bhedena dvayoh api pakshayoh avirodhah kalpyah |*** [[55]]   
From one side of *Meru* mountain up to the shell, 25 crores is half of the expanse of the *bhoomi*, 25 crores on one side and 25 crores on the other side, totalling 50 crore *yojanaas*. On the top and below also, it is the same thing, 50 crores. As *Suka* says, between *Soorya anda* and *gola*, it is 25 crores. Compared to the expanse of the *lokaas*, this is 2.5 crores and 3.5 lakhs, double that will be the measure of *Kaanchana bhoomi*, the land of gold, which is 5 crore and 7 lakhs. The remaining 17 crores should be taken as the measure of the *Tama kataaha*. Why *Paraasharar* is telling about these numbers, and the expanses of these islands and oceans is in order to generate *vairaagya*, and the greatness of *Bhagavaan*, who is the Creator of this whole world. If it is such a big expanse, where people are getting created, going through the cycle of births and deaths, how difficult it is to escape from this; one has to get *vairaagya*, various worlds told, various pleasures enjoyed, good things, again, people are in this *prakruti mandala* only, again and again. One should get *vairaagya* understanding all these things, to escape from *samsaara*. This is the purpose of telling these measures. And also to remind us of the greatness of the *Bhagavaan*. He is not very much interested in these numbers and calculations. In whatever way you want to know about the 50 crores, know it. Some people say that half the diameter is 50 crores, and they it has an expanse of 100 crores. This is told in *Varaaha Puraana* also. *Bhoo mandala* is 100 crores. This is told in *Shiva Rahasya, **Skanda Puraana*. 35 crores, 19 lakhs, 40 thousand *yojanaas*. It is said that there is a huge pit filled with water. 1 crore *yojanaas* is the *kataaha*. Between *Soorya **Anda* and *Kataaha*, there is 25 crore *yojanaas*. In *Bhaagavata*, there is also mention of *Soorya*. This is to be understood as the distance lighted by the rays of the Sun. *Shaastreeya angula* is 24 inches, here it is 12 inches; this way, 50 crores becomes 100 crores. Or, we can say that it is 50 crores in one kalpa, and 100 crores in another kalpa. 



We should not look at it that it is correct in one *Puraana* and incorrect in another. It can be difference in *kalpaas*. It can be different in *loukika maana* and *shaastreeya **maana*. 





## 97
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 4, Shloka 97:    
Seyam dhaatree vidhaatree cha sarva bhoota gunaadhikaa |   
Aadhaara bhootaa sarvesham maitreya jagataam iti || ***This earth is support of everyone and is made of five *gunaas*; this is where everyone lives. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Seyam iti | Dhaatree oshadhidvaaraa poshakaree | Vidhaatree kartree | Guna   
adhikaa pancha gunatvaat | ***Earth nurtures the beings through the trees and herbs. Or as the doer. 



This concludes Chapter Four of Amsha Two. [[56]]   




***|| Iti Sti Vishnu Puraane Dviteeya Amshe Chaturtho Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Vishnu Chitteeye Dviteeye Amshe Chaturtho Adhyaayah   
||   
   
 [[57]]   
***   
|| Atha Panchamo Adhyaayah ||   
Nether Worlds, Greatness of Ananta ***



Now, the Fifth Chapter. 


