+++
title = "05"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 1:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Vistaara esha kathitah pruthivyaa bhavato mayaa |   
Saptatih tu sahasraani dvija ucchraayo api kathyate ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- I have told you, O Maitreya, the expanse of this whole earth. 70 thousand is the height, it is told. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vistaara iti | Saptati sahasra ucchraayatvam sapta bhoomika praasaada   
nyaayena | ***It is like a huge building with 7 storeys. 





## 2
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 2:    
Dasha saahasram ekaikam paataalam munisattama |   
Atalam vitalam cha eva nitalam cha gabhastimat |   
Mahaakhyam sutalam chaagryam paataalam cha api saptamam || ***Each one is 10 thousand, and the *Paataala*. The *Paataala lokaas* are told - *Atala, **Vitala, Nitala, Gabhastimat, Mahaatala, Sutala, Paataala*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dasha saahasram iti | Dasha sahasrena bhoomi tat vivaramaana vibhaagah shiva   
rahasya uktah \* Tat antara putaah sapta naagaah sura samaashrayaah |   
Yojanaanaam cha aayutaani sapta tattva artha chintakaih | Sahasra yojanaani   
eshaam dalaani antara nemayah | Pratyekasho antaraani eshaam sahasraani   
navaadhvanaam || iti | Adhvanaam yojanaanaam iti arthah | Atra vishesho   
vaayu uktah \* Pruthivyaam udakam saa cha pruthivyaam upari sthitaa |   
Aakaashancha aparamadhyah punah bhoomih punah jalam || iti | Mahaakhyam   
mahaa talam | Tat cha vaalukaamayam |*** In *Shiva Rahasya*, it is told - There are seven worlds where the *Naagaas* and gods are all living. 10 thousand *yojanaas* each, totally 70 thousand *yojanaas*. 1 thousand *yojanaas* is the expanse of each layer. 9 thousand *yojanaas* is the gap between them. *Vaayu Puraana* also talks about this. There is *Aakaasha, Bhoomi, Jala*, like this, it continues. 



[[58]]   
**www.sadagopan.org** 





## 3
**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 3:    
Shukla krushna arunaah peetaah sharkaraah shaila kaanchanaah |   
Bhoomayo yatra maitreya vara praasada manditaah || ***The seven worlds - *Atala, Vitala, Nitala, Gabhastimat, Mahaatala, **Sutala* and *Paataala*, in these, white, black, red, yellow, made of sand, stone, gold - the earth is made of these things. Each one is one story, like a building. 





## 4
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 4:    
Teshu daanava daiteya jaatayah shatashah tathaa |   
Nivasanti mahaanaaga jaatayah cha mahaamune ||*** In these worlds, *daanavaas, daiteyaas*, there are hundreds like this. And also those belonging to the class of serpents. 





## 5
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 5:    
Svarlokaat api ramyaani paataalaani iti naaradah |   
Praaha svargasadaam madhye paataala abhyaagato divi || ****Naarada* has said that they are more beautiful than even heavens. *Naarada* went to *Paataala loka* and saw all the beautiful things there and went to *svarga loka* and told them that *Paataala loka* is more beautiful than heavens. 





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 6:    
Aahlaadakaarinah shubhraah manayo yatra suprabhaah |   
Naaga aabharana bhooshaasu paataalam kena tat samam ||*** They are very pleasant, they bring great joy, clean, and have lot of bright gems. We can see the gems worn as ornaments by the serpents. What can equal this *Paataala*? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aahlaadakaarinah iti | Naaga aabharana iti | Aabhriyata iti aabharanam,   
naagaih bhriyamaanah tu bhooshaasu | Yat va bhooshaah choodaadi   
alamkaaraah nityaah phanaa mani prabhrutayo vaa | Naaga aabharana   
bhooshaasu iti cha paathah | ***That which is worn is an ornament. On the hood, it is said to be a gem, *mani*, which is very bright and shining, with a lot of lustre, and they are all decorated with these. *Paataala loka* is extremely beautiful. There is no other world equal to this. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 7:    
Daitya daanava kanyaabhih itah cha itah cha shobhite |   
Paataale kasya na preetih vimuktasya api jaayate ||*** All the damsels of *daityaas* and *daanavaas*, are all roaming around there. The whole world is joyful and beautiful to see. Who will not like this? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Daitya daanava kanyaabhih iti | Vimuktasya - vishaya raaga vimuktasya | [[59]]   
Those who have controlled their sense will also get attracted by the beautiful things in this *Paataala loka*. 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 8:    
Diva arka rashmayo yatra prabhaam tanvanti na aatapam |   
Shashirashmih na sheetaaya nishi dyotaaya kevalam ||*** The Sun's rays do not cause any heat, but bring only brightness. There is no suffering because of the light of the Sun. In the same way, the rays of the moon do not cause chillness or cold, but they brighten up the whole place. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Diva ityaadi | Rashmi pravesha vachanaat dvaara sadbhaavo anumeyah | ***Because it is told that sunlight is coming all over, we can infer that there is entrance to the light. 





## 9
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 9:    
Bhakshya bhojya mahaa paanam uditaih api bhogibhih |   
Yatra na jnyaayate kaalo gato api danuja aadibhih || ***All the various delicacies and food items and varieties of drinks are available. The serpents who are there are enjoying this, and don't realize how time passes there. 





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 10:    
Vanaani nadyo ramyaani saraamsi kamalaakaraah |   
Pumskokilaa abhilaapaah cha manojnyaani ambaraani cha || ***There are wonderful parks and rivers, forests and streams, filled with lotuses. The male cuckoos are all the time making pleasant sounds. Nice dresses are available. 





## 11
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 11:    
Bhooshanaani ati shubhraani gandhaadhyam cha anulepanam |   
Veena venu mrudangaanaam svanaih aapooritaani cha || ***Pure and good dresses are available, and all kinds of fragrances and pastes which are fragrant. Air is filled with the sounds of *Veena, Venu, Mrudanga* and these instruments. 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 12:    
Etaani anyaani cha udaara bhaagya bhogyaani daanavaih |   
Daitya uragaih cha bhujyante paataala antara gocharaih || ***All these and also many more, those endowed with the *bhaagyaas* enjoy there, the *daanavaas, daityaas*, serpents. They enjoy all these available in the *Paataala **loka*. Those who live there are *daityaas, uragaas* and *daanavaas*. The demons and serpents who live there are enjoying all those things. [[60]]   




The greatness of *Paataala loka* is told. There is also description of *Ananta* who is bearing the whole earth. We are studying the 5th *Adhyaaya*, we were studying the description of the lower worlds - *Atala, Vitala, Nitala, Gabhastimat, Mahaatala, Sutala* and *Paataala*. These are the seven worlds, and these are also *bhoga bhoomis*. Those who live there enjoy all kinds of pleasures and enjoyment, and it is much better than heaven; this is what *Naarada* was telling, after having seen these *lokaas*. Those endowed with that kind of *punya* to be in those *lokaas*, enjoy different kinds of food, music. 





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 13:    
Paataalaanaam adhah cha aaste vishnoh yaa taamasee tanuh |   
Sheshaakhyaa yat gunaan vaktum na shaktaa daitya daanavaah ||*** Below the *Paataala* is *Ananta*, the great serpent. Now, *Paraasharar* is going to tell about the greatness of that *Ananta*. All the *daityaas* and *daanavaas* who are there are unable to describe the excellent qualities of that *Shesha Naaga*, which is said to be the *taamasee tanu* of Vishnu below the *Paataala*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Paataalaanaam iti | \* Tasya moola deshe trimshat yojana sahasra antara aaste   
yaa vai kalaa bhagavatah taamasee samaakhyaataa anante \* iti bhaagavat uktih   
| Taamasee samhaara hetubhoota tamo adhishthaatree | Ata eva asya vadanaat   
kaala agni rudra nishkramanam uttaratra uchyate |*** This is said to be thirty thousand *yojanaas*, it is called *Taamasee*, the form of *Bhagavaan Vishnu*, and is called *Ananta*, as told in *Bhaagavata. Taamasee* means it is the cause of *samhaara*, dissolution, and it is *tamas* which is the cause of *samhaara*; the *adhishtaatru devataa* of that is called *Taamasee*. Later on, it will be told that from the mouth of *Ananta*, the *Kaala Agni* called *Rudra* comes out and does the *samhaara*, the fire which comes during dissolution. 





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 14:    
Yo anantah pathyate siddhaih devo devarshi poojitah |   
Yah sahasra shiraa vyaktah svastikaamala bhooshanah ||*** He is called *Ananta*, and is being worshipped by all *Devarshis*, and is is God Himself. He has thousand hoods. There is one sign on the hood called *Svastika*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yo iti | Svastikam phanastha rekhaa chinha visheshah | ****Svastika* is a special sign which is present on the hood of *Ananta*. 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 15:    
Phanaa mani sahasrena yah sa vidyotayan dishah | [[61]]   
***Sarvaan karoti nirveeryaan hitaaya jagato asuraan || ***He brightens up all the directions, everywhere, all around, with the thousands of gems present on the hoods. The radiance, brilliance of the gems is so much that for the good of the world, it makes all the demons lose their valour, makes them very weak. 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 16:    
Madaaghoonita netro asou yah sadaa eva eka kundalah |   
Kireetee sragdharo bhaati saagnih shveta ivaachalah || ***His eyes are always as though intoxicated, He is having ear ornaments, wears a crown, and also wears a wonderful garland. He shines as though it is a white mountain with a fire on top of it. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 17:    
Neela vaasaa madodriktah shveta haara upashobhitah |   
Saabhra gangaa pravaaho asou kailaasa adrih iva aparah || ***He is wearing a dark blue cloth. He is always excited with intoxication, He is shining with the white garland. He looks like another *Kailaasa Shikhara*, which is with all clouds and flux of *Gangaa* river flowing out. His ornaments, garland and cloth look as though there is another huge *Kailaasa* mountain itself, with clouds and *Gangaa* river flowing out. 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 18:    
Laangala aasakta hastaagro vibhran musalam uttamam |   
Upaasyate svayam kaantyaa yo vaarunyaa cha moortayaa || ***He is holding the plough, pestle, in His hands, and *Shobhaa Devi, Vaaruni **Devi* do *upaasana* of Him. 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 19:    
Kalpaante yasya vaktrebhyo vishaanala shikha ujvalah |   
Sankarshana aatmako rudro nishkramya atti jagat trayam ||*** At the end of the *kalpa*, from His mouth, the flames of the poisonous fire come out, this is nothing but *Rudra*, who is said to be having *Sankarshana* as His *aatman*, and eats up the three worlds. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kalpaante iti | Sankarshana aatmakah sankarshana adhishthitah | ****Sankarshana* is the form of Vishnu, who is responsible for dissolution. 





## 20
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 20:    
Sa bibhrat shekhareebhootam ashesham kshiti mandalam |   
Aaste paataala moolasthah shesho ashesha sura architah || ***Bearing on His head, the entire world, *Shesha* sits at the bottom of *Paataala*, and is [[62]]   
being worshipped by all the gods. 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 21:    
Tasya veeryam prabhaavah cha svaroopam roopam eva cha |   
Na hi varnayitum shakyam jnyaatum vaa tridashaih api ||*** His valour, zeal, power, real nature, His form, gods cannot even know it, what to talk about describing it? It is so great. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tasya iti | Veeryam utsaahah, prabhaavah shaktih, svaroopam tattvam, roopam   
aakaarah | ***





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 22:    
Yasya eshaa sakalaa pruthivee phanaa mani shikha arunaa |   
Aaste kusuma maalaa iva kah tat veeryam vadishyati || ***This entire world, with the gems of His hood, looks reddish. It looks as though it is like a garland of flowers. Who can even talk about His greatness. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 23:    
Yadaa vijhrumbate ananto madaaghoornita lochanah |   
Tadaa chalati bhooh eshaa sa adri toyaa sa kaananaa || ***When He wakes up with excitement, *Ananta* with all His eyes as though intoxicated, the whole world with all the oceans and forests moves, shakes up. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 24:    
Gandharva apsarasah siddhaah kinnara uraga chaaranaah |   
Na antam gunaanaam gacchanti tena ananto ayam avyayah ||*** *Gandharvaas, Apsaraas, Siddhaas, Kinnaraas, Chaaranaas*, serpents, are not able to know His qualities completely; that is why He is called *Ananta*; there is no end to the greatness of His qualities, unchanging always. 





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 25:    
Yasya naaga vadhoo hastaih gaalitam hari chandanam |   
Muhuh shvaasa anilaapaastam yaati dikshodavaasataam || ***The *Naaga* women with their hands, smear sandal paste on His body. Being carried by His breath, it spreads over, and everything gets fragrant with sandal particles everywhere. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yasya iti | Gaalitam vastra shodhitam | Lambhitam harichandanam iti paathe   
lambhitam samaalamba nikrutam, anga raageekrutam iti arthah | Diksha   
udavaasataam dishaam kshodavaasataam, adhivaasa choornatvam | Dikshu   
udavaasataam iti paathe dikshu jala aadhivaasana choornatvam iti | [[63]]   
Particles of the sandal spread all over in all directions, being carried by His breath. 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 26:    
Yam aaraadhya puraana arpih gargo jyoteemshi tattvatah |   
Jnyaatavaan sakalam cha eva nimitta pathitam phalam || ****Garga Rishi* worshipped this *Ananta*, and mastered all the *Jyotisha* and *Nimitta **vidyaas*, astrology, predicting the good and bad things which are going to happen by using the movements and positions of the planets, comets, etc. This is the greatness of *Ananta*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yam iti | Nimitte graha chaara utvaata shakuna aadou shubha ashubha   
soochake, pathitam | Nimitta phalitam iti cha paathah | ***





## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 5, Shloka 27:    
Tena iyam naaga varyena shirasaa vidhrutaa mahee |   
Bibharti maalaam lokaanaam sat eva asura maanushaam || ***This entire world, is born on the head by this excellent serpent, *Ananta*. He bears this chain of worlds having *devaas, asuraas, manushyaas*. He supports all the worlds on His head. 



This concludes the Fifth Chapter. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Dviteeye Amshe Panchamo Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Dviteeye Amshe   
Panchamo Adhyaayah || ***



*** [[64]]   
***   
|| Atha Shashto Adhyaayah ||   
Narakaas and Praayaschitta, Greatness of Harinaama   
Samsmarana*** 



Now the Sixth Chapter. This describes the different kinds of hell. 


