+++
title = "08"

+++


*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 1:   
Sri Paraasharah -   
Vyaakhyaatam etat brahmaanda samsthaanam tava suvrata |   
Tatah pramaana samsthaane sooryaadeenaam shrunushva me ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- This entire *Brahmaanda*, its form, location, expanse and measure, were told to you by me. Listen to me about the location and size, measure of the Sun, various planets. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha jyotischakram | Vyaakhyaatam iti | Etat brahmaanda samsthaanam mayaa   
tava vyaakhyaatam | ***The *nakshatra mandala * is going to be told. The *Brahmaanda samsthaana * was told to you by me. 



First, the Sun's chariot is explained in great detail. How the movements happen, the various parts of the Sun's chariot are told in great detail. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 2:   
Yojanaanaam sahasraani bhaaskarasya ratho nava |   
Eeshaa dandah tathaa eva asya dviguno munisattama ||*** The Sun's *ratha * is nine thousand *yojanaas*. The pole is twice that. 



The chariot has various parts. The body of the chariot, which is supported by two axles, these axles have wheels. At the centre of the axle is the main pole which extends forward. There is the yoke, to which are tied the horses, which are controlled by two reins. The wheel has got hub, spokes, outer circumference. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yojanaanaam iti | Bhaaskarasya deha vyaapto ratha bhaago nava saahasrah;   
vakshyamaana gandharvaadi parivaara avakaashaartho rathaamshah cha   
sahasra maatrah; ittham dasha sahasro rathah; \* Mandalam bhaaskarasya atha   
yojanaanaan nibodhata | Nava yojana saahasro vistaaro bhaaskarasya tu | iti \*   
Dasha yojana saahasro vistaaraayaamato rathah \* iti cha tejomayatayaa   
doorato mandalatvena drushyamaanasya tat dehasya nava sahasratayaa tat   
rathasya cha dasha sahasratayaa vaayu ukteh | Eeshaadandah dvigunah -   
vimshati yojana sahasrah | ***Page **108** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **The main body of the Sun is 9000 *yojanaas*. There is also a part of the chariot where all the *gandharvaas * and others are supported; this portion of the chariot is 1000 *yojanaas*. So, the total length of the chariot is 10000 *yojanaas. Vaayu **Puraana * says that Surya Mandala is 9000 *yojanaas*. The expanse of the chariot is 10000 *yojanaas*. What is seen as the bright body of the Sun is 9000 *yojanaas*, and the chariot is 10000 *yojanaas*. The pole is twice this, 20000 *yojanaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 3:   
Saardha kotih tathaa sapta niyutaani adhikaani vai |   
Yojanaanaam tu tasya akshah tatra chakram pratishthitam || ***One crore and fifty seven lakh *yojanaas*, is the axle, at the end of the axle are the wheels established. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Saardha kotih iti | Adhikaani cha panchaashat sahasra yojanaani aameroh   
maanasottara paryantam sthitasya iha mahaakshatvena vivakshitatvaat tatra   
meru madhya upari shodasha sahasra ucchrita gaganastha uttara agre   
maanasottara upari ardha lakshocchrita antariksha avasthita dakshinaagre   
mahaakshe - \* chakram hiranmayena analpena iti maatsya uktamaanam   
samvatsara aatmaka kaalachakratayaa upaasyam pratishitam |*** Fifty thousand *yojanaas*, from the *Meru parvata * to the *Maanasottara parvata*, is said to be the great axle, on top of the *Meru parvata*, on top of it, 16000 *yojanaas * above, in the sky, on the northern edge; and on top of the *Maanasottara parvata*, 50000 *yojanaas * above, in the sky, on the southern tip, is the *Mahaaksha*; at the end of that is the *chakram*, wheel, which is golden, and huge, as told in the *Maatsya **Puraana*. The *chakra * of the *ratha * is said to be *kaala chakra*, which is made of the *samvatsaraas*, and this is how it is used for meditating. 



*Ayuta * is 10000. *Niyuta * is one lakh. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 4:   
Trinaabhimati panchaare shanneminyakshayaatmake |   
Samvatsaramaye krutsnam kaala chakram \(chakre\) pratishthitam ||*** There are three naves for the wheel, and there are five spokes. There are six outer circumferential rings. These are going on forever. The *kaala chakra * is established in that. 



The numbers differ in various *Puraanaas*. This is told in the commentary. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Trinaabhimati iti | Trinaabhi iti aadeh maatsya ukti vyaakhyaa \* Ahah   
trinaabhih sooryasya ekachakrasya vai smrutam | Araah samvatsaraah pancha   
nemyah shat rutavah smrutaah || iti vaayu uktih tu \* Ahah trinaabhih sooryasya ***Page **109** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****araah pancha rutavah smrutaah | ****Trinaabhi * is told in the *Maatsya Puraana*. In one wheel, there are three *naabhis*, naves, which are the three parts of the day. Spokes are said to be five *samvatsaraas*. The circumference, *nemi*, is said to be the six *rutus*, seasons. *Vaayu Puraana * says that the spokes are the five seasons. 



***Nemhyah shat rutavah tasya iti |*** Six seasons are said to be the *nemis*, the outer circumferential rings. 



***Yat vaa chaaturmaasyaih trinaabhih hemanta shishirayoh aikyam krutvaa   
panchabhih panchaaram, shat rutubhih shannemi |*** If we take six seasons, *hemanta * and *shishira * taken together are said to be the fifth one. Six seasons are the six *nemis*. 



***Tathaa hi yaaskena niruktam \* Trinaabhi chakram tu rutu samvatsaro greeshmo   
varshaa hemanta iti samvatsaram sarvam atra abhih touti panchare chakra iti,   
pancha rutatayaa \* pancha rutavah samvatsarasya, iti cha braahmanam |*** *Yaaskaachaarya* in *Nirukta * says that there are three naves in the wheel, seasons are *greeshma, varsha, hemanta*; five seasons are told. *Taittiriya Braahmana * also tells that there are five seasons in a year. 



***Hemanta shishirayoh samaasena shat ara aahuh arpitam iti shat rututayaa   
araah prasrutaa naabhim iti cha |*** *Hemanta* and *Shishira * are combined, they are told as the sixth one. Six seasons are told as five spokes. 



***Akshayaatmake nitya pravaahe |*** They are going on, continuing forever. 



***Chakram iti paathe saptami arthe prathamaa | Praak ukte samvatsara aatmake   
kaala chakre krutsna kaala aayattam jagat pratishthitam |*** The *kaala chakra* which is made of *samvatsaraas*, the entire world which is controlled by time is established there. 



***Trinaabhi pancha aratva aadikam hi chakra visheshanam \* Dvaadasha prathayah   
chakram ekam treeni nataani iti pancha are chakre, iti shruteh |*** They are all qualifying the wheel - *trinaabhi, pancha ara. Shruti pramaana * is also told. 



***Yat vaa poorva shloka ukte samvatsara aadi kaalaatmakatayaa upaasye ravi   
ratha chakre krutsnam kaala chakram parivartana sheelam kaala avayavat   
brundam sthitam |*** Or, it can be told like this also. The wheel is said to be *kaala chakra*, made Page **110** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **of *samvatsaraas*. The *kaala chakra * is for meditation, in the wheel of the chariot of the Sun. The entire thing which is undergoing modifications time and again, is all established there. ***   
Laksha pramaanam ityaadi hrasvaakshasya yat pramaanam tat eva tasya   
rathasya yuga khandayoh samhatya maanam; saardha pancha chatvaarimshat   
sahasram tasya yugam iti arthah |*** There are two axles, the *Mahaaksha * and the *Hrasvaaksha. Mahaaksha * is the great axle, and *Hrasvaaksha * is the shorter axle. *Hrasvaaksha * is said to be one lakh *yojanaas*. The two parts of the yoke are also of the same measure as the smaller axle. The yoke is forty five thousand five hundred *yojanaas * in measure. 



***Yugasya khandayoh pruthak uktih viniyogadvaidhaat |*** Though it is one yoke, it is said to be made of two parts, the southern part and northern part, as they are used for different purposes. 



***Tathaa hi meru maanasottaraavadhi vyaapta mahaaksha upari tat anukoolyena   
yamala avasthitah udak dakshinaayaana kaashtayoh antaraala mandaleshu   
rathasya aakarshana vikarshanaartham dhruva gruheeta vaata rashmi baddhah   
kuvinda naadivat sanchaaree hrasvaakshah; tat upari baddho dasha sahasro   
ratho avatishthate; hrasvaaksha madhyam aarabhya ratha dviguna   
eeshaadandah pratyanmukho jnyeyah; \* Dvi guno asya rathopasthaat   
eeshaandah pramaanatah; \* iti maatsya ukteh | ***The *Mahaaksha*, great axle, which is extending from *Meru parvata * up to *Maanasottara **parvata*, on top of the *Mahaaksha*, like a pair, the northern and southern tips, the mandala which is existing in between that, in order to pull it towards, and also leave it to go in the other direction, there are reins made of *Vaayu*, and it is held by *Dhruva*. The smaller axle moves like the rod in a weaving mill, and it is established on top of the great axle, in between the northern and southern tips. On top of that is the actual chariot which is ten thousand *yojanaas*. Starting from the centre of the smaller axle, double the size of the *ratha*, twenty thousand *yojanaas*, is the pole extending westwards. There is a *pramaana * from *Matsya Puraana * told. 



***Eeshaagre tiryang nibaddha madhyam harasvaaksha samadairdhyam yugam;   
yugasya vaamaardham sapta asva bandhane viniyuktam \* Asangaih turagaih   
yuktam yatah chakram tatah sthitaih iti lainga ukteh \* Sapta ahshva roopa   
cchandaamsi vahanto vaamato ravim iti lainga vaayavya ukteh cha |*** At the end of the pole which is extending westwards, is the yoke which is downwards, in the centre, below the pole is tied the yoke, same length as the smaller pole. The left half of the yoke is used to tie the seven horses. *Linga Puraana pramaana * is told. The horses are said to be seven *cchandas*. 



***Rathottara bhaagastha yugaardham tu meru aasannam tat vaayu rashmi ***Page **111** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****dvaaraa dhruva aadhaaram |*** The half part of the yoke which is present in the northern part of the *ratha*, chariot, is near to *Meru*. Through the reins, it is held by *Dhruva*. 



***Evam tena yugaardhena saha hrasvaaksharottara bhaago api meru aasanno   
dhruva rashmi baddhah tat dvaaraa dhruvaadhaarah |*** The northern part of the smaller axle also, along with yoke, is also located closer to *Meru*. The northern part of the yoke, and also the smaller axle, are both held by the reins by *Dhruva*. ***   
Etena hrasva aakshasya rathottara bhaagastha yugaagram cha ubhyam deergha   
aksha upari sthita tryasheeti shata mandala rekhaa maargena sanchaaraat   
ratha dakshina bhaage svasvaagradvaya nibaddha rashmibhyaam dhruvena   
udagayane meru abhimukham aakrushyate; dakshinaayane mahaaksha upari eva   
maanasottara abhimukham shithileekrutya vikrushyate |*** The small axle, and the yoke which is in the northern part of the chariot, both are on top of the great axle, is 183, which is half the year. \(183 multiplied by 2 gives 366\). There is a *mandala * made of 183 *rekhaas*, each one is representing a day. Through two reins which are held, *Dhruva * pulls those reins towards *Meru parvata*, during *Uttaraayana*. He lets it loose, on top of the *Mahaaksha*, it moves towards the *Maanasottara parvata*, in *Dakshinaayana*. 



This is how the chariot moves towards north and south during *Uttaraayana * and *Dakshinaayana*. 



***Tena mahaaksha upari yantrita hrasva akshastha bimbasya dakshinottara gatih   
naanyathaa iti uktam bhavati |*** This is how the *hrasva aksha bimba* is moving, is is said. 



***Yat lainga maatsya vaayavyeshu \* Yugaaksha koti sambandhou dvou rashmee   
syandanasya tu | Dhruvena pragruheetou tou vikrushya yugayoh tu vai ||*** *Linga, Matsya, Vaayu puraanaas* are quoted here. Connected to the yoke and axle are two reins of the chariot. *Dhruva * is holding them. 



***Yugaaksha kotisthou tasya dakshine syandanasya tu | Dhruvena pragruheetou   
tou rashmee you nayato ravim ||   
Bhramato mandalaani syuh khecharasya rathasya tu | Bhramantam   
anugacchantou dhruvam rashmee tu tou ubhou || ****Dhruva * is going along with that chariot. 



***Hrasatah tasya rashmee tu mandaleshu uttaraayane | Vardhete dakshine chaiva   
bhramato mandalaani tu ||*** The reins become shorter during *Uttaraayana*. They become longer Page **112** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **during *Dakshinaayana*. 



***Aakrushyete yadaa tou tu dhruvena adhisthitou tadaa | So abhyantara gatah   
sooryo bhramate mandalaani tu ||*** When he pulls it, it goes around in that *mandala*. 



***Dhruvena muchyamaanaabhyaam rashmibhyaam punareva tu | Tathaa eva   
baahyatah sooryo bhramate mandalaani tu ||*** This is how *Dhruva * is pulling the reins, and leaving it loose, so that the Sun goes round in the mandala. 



***Evam sarva aadhaara bhooto mahaaksho api dhruvena rashmi antarena   
bhraamyamaanah chakram bhraamayan pratyak bhramati |*** The *Mahaaksha* which is supporting everything, is also moving, going around. 



***Yathaa aaha vaayuh \* Chakram akshe nibaddham tu dhruve chaakshah   
samarpitah | Sahachakro bhramati akshah sahaaksho bhramati dhruvah ||*** *Vaayu* says that the wheel is tied to the axle, and *Dhruva * is controlling through the reins. Along with the wheel, the axle also is moving. Along with the axle, *Dhruva * is also moving. 



***Dviteeye aksha iti dviteeya shabdena sannihita hrasva aksha apekshayaa tatra   
chakram pratishthitam iti praak ukta viniyogou mahaakshah smaryate |*** This is the explanation for how the Sun moves through the northern and southern tips, how the *mandalaas * are established, that there are two axles, that they are held by *Vaayu rashmi*, reins of *Vaayu*, by *Dhruva. Dhruva * pulls it towards *Meru*, and leaves it, and this is how the *ratha * is moving in the *Surya Mandala*. 



More details are coming next. We are studying about *Surya Mandala * and *Surya Ratha *. In the commentary, *Sri Engal **Aalwaan * gives a very detailed description of the entire arrangement. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 5:   
Hayaah cha sapta cchandaamsi teshaam naamaani me shrunu |   
Gaayatree cha bruhati ushnik jagatee trishtup eva cha |   
Anushthup panktih iti uktaa cchandaamsi harayo raveh || ***The seven horses tied to the *ratha * are said to be the seven *cchandas - Gayatri, **Bruhati, Ushnik, Jagati, Trishtup, Anushthup, Pankti*. These are for meditation purposes, as explained in the Commentary. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 6:   
Chatvaarimshat sahasraani dviteeyo akshou vivasvatah | ***Page **113** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Panchaayaani tu saardhaani syandanasya mahaa mate || ***The Sun's second axle is 45500 *yojanaas * in length. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 7:   
Aksha pramaanam ubhayoh pramaanam tat yugaardhayoh |   
Hrasvo akshah tat yugaardhena dhruvaadharo rathasya vai |   
Dviteeye akshe tu tat chakram samsthitam maanasaa achale || ***The yoke is also of the same length as the smaller axle. One half of the yoke and one end of the smaller axle at the northern end are tied to the reins made of *Vaayu*, and held by *Dhruva*. To the big axle, the wheel is attached, and it is located at the *Manasottara parvata*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Hayaah cha ityaadi | Cha shabdena praak viniyuktaat uttara yugaarddhaat   
itarasmin dviteeye ratha vaama yugaardhe cchandomayatvena upaasyaah sapta   
ashvaah cha samsthitaah iti anushangaat tat yogya yugaarddhapadam labhyate   
|*** Whatever was earlier told as the northern end of the yoke, the other half of the yoke at the left part of the chariot, where the seven horses made of *cchandas*, basically for meditation. This is how the second half of the yoke is explained. 



***Atra iyam paripaatee jnyaatavyaa jamboo dveepa madhye meruh, tat upari   
pancha dashalakshe dhruvah, meroh upari shodasha sahasra antarikshe mahaa   
akshasya moolam tasya agram sa chakram maanasaadri upari ardha lakshe   
antarikshe, mahaakshe tryasheeti shata mandala rekhaah tat tat dine ravi   
bimba bhramana gochara aakaasha pradesha vrutta upaadhi bhootaa dakshina   
uttara kaashtayoh antaraalabhavaa mandalaakhyaah merum madhya bindum   
krutvaa tat tat rekhaa garbham aakaashe tat tat dina bimba bhramanam   
utpadyate | ***This is the arrangement. At the centre of *Jamboo dveepa * is *Meru parvata*. On top of that, 15 lakh *yojanaas * above, is the *Dhruva Mandala*. On top of the *Meru parvata*, 16,000 *yojanaas * above in the sky, the locus of the great axle is located. At the end of that great axle is the wheel, on top of the *Maanasa parvata*, 50,000 *yojanaas * above in the sky, in the great axle, 183 tracks are there in the *mandala*; in each day, the orb of the Sun is moving, every single track is tread on a single day by the Sun as it moves, Sun moves one track at a time. Between the north and south end, the *mandalaas * are located, making *Meru * as the centre point, in the track in the sky. Between the south and north ends, there are tracks running east to west, there are tracks located, where the sun moves in the east track every single day, moving north to south, and south to north, as it moves gradually each day. 183 days one way, and 183 days other way, so 366 days in one year. Half the year is *Uttaraayana*, and half the year is *Dakshinaayana*. 



Page **114** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Yaavat dakshinottara kaashtham tryasheeti adhika shata dina gamyatvaat   
ayanasya taavanti mandalaani syuh |*** From the south and north ends, it takes 183 days to move from north to south, or south to north. In each track per day, it keeps traversing, towards north or south. Every single day is like a track. In each *ayana*, there are 183 *mandalaas*. 



***Tatraakshe ratho dasha sahasramito ravi bimbaadi shabda vyapadeshyo   
mahaaksha upari sanchaarinaa hrasvaakshena samyutah pratyangmukhah, sa   
cha jyotishchakra bhraamaka pravaha aanilaakhya dhruva rashmi vashaat graha   
taaraa ganaih sahita evam prati aham pratyangmukham eka vaaram merum   
pradakshinayan eva hrasvaaksha yuga uttara koti agra baddha dhruva gruheeta   
vaata rashmi dvaya aakarshana vikarshana vashaat nakshatra chakra maargena   
cha kinchit kinchit praglambamaana eva udak dakshinaayanayoh yaavat   
kaashthaantam anukrushyate vikrushyate cha, ashvinyaam drashta grahasya   
anantaram kaalaantare tat puratah sthita bharanyaadou sthita darshanaat   
kinchit praaggatih cha rashmi antara vashaat sva svachaara aanugunyaat   
siddhaa |*** In that axle, the *ratha * which is 10,000 *yojanaas * long, the orb of the Sun; on top of the great axle is the smaller axle which is moving, and is attached to it, facing westward; *jyotischakra * is *nakshatra * mandala, it rotates along with that, and the reins held by *Dhruva*, which is made of *Vaayu*, along with the group of planets, stars, every single day, facing westwards, it goes round *Meru*, circling around it; yoke and the smaller axle which are on the northern side, the reins are tied to it, those reins are pulled towards it, or away from it; slowly little by little, it bends towards the east; it moves from north to south, it is being pulled, or made to move away from that; whatever is seen in the *Ashvini nakshatra*, after some time, it is seen in *Bharani*, then it moves a little towards east; these *nakshatraas * are located across the rains, and the movement of the sun along *mandalaas * is explained like this, from north to south and south to north, and every single day in each mandala. 



***Evam dakshinottara cchaayaa darshanaat udak dakshinaa gatih cha siddhaa |*** As we see the Sun moving from north to south, slowly and gradually in each mandala, this is how the movement is obtained. 



***Taaraa chakram naama tat tat kaala parisrushya vyomaavat cchedakam   
cchaatraakaaram ashvinyaadi sapta vimshati ghishni avibhakti aakaasha   
kshetrakam jyotirmandalam meru madhyastha dhruva naabhikam |*** *Nakshatra mandala * is whatever is seen at that time in the sky, like an umbrella, *Ashvini, Bharani*, the 27 *nakshatraas * which are there in the sky, whatever is seen at that time in the *Taaraa chakra*, it has *Meru * as the centre, and *Dhruva * as the nave. 



***Tat punah dvaadhashadhaa kalpita meshaadi raashi aatmanaa vibhaktam |*** Page **115** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **This is again broken into twelve parts, *Mesha*, the twelve *raashis*. 



***Sapaadam ashvini aadi nakshatra dvaya kshetram hi meshaadih ekaiko raashih |*** *Ashvini, Bharani*, and one quarter of the next one, which is two and a quarter, like this is each *raashi * like *Mesha*. 



***Tatra dhanurmakara sandhou maanasottara aasanne dakshina parama   
kaashthaayaam uttaraayana upakramah |*** *Uttaraayana * starts when *Dhanus * and *Makara raashi * meet near the *Maanasottara **parvata*, and this is the southern tip; this is when the northern movement starts. 



***Evam mithuna karki sandhou neru aasanne udak kaashthaante dakshinaayana   
aarambhah |*** On the northern end, when *Mithuna * and *Karki * meet on top of the *Meru*, this is when *Dakshinaayana * starts, moving south afterwards. 



***Tat cha bhachakam kinchit dakshina namnam udak unnata praayam   
poorvaabhimukha pradakshina nibaddha ashvini aadi nakshatra kalpita   
raashikam |*** The *nakshatra mandala * is little bit bent downwards on the southern side, and little raised on the northern side. Facing east on the south are the *Ashvini * and other *nakshatraas*. 



***Tatra hi uttaraashaadha dviteeya paadaadi saardha trayodasharksha kshetram   
uttaram ayanam ekaardheh; ardhaantare tu punarvasu antyapaadaadi saardha   
trayodasharksha kshetram dakshinam | ***Starting with second *paada * of *Uttaraashaadha*, the 13 *nakshatraas * and a half, is one half is *Uttaraayana*. The other half is last *paada * of *Punarvasu*, thirteen and a half, is *Dakshinaayana*. 



***Meena mesha sandhih udak vishuvat madhyam kanyaa tulaa sandhi dakshinam   
vishuvam |*** *Uttara vishuva* is when *Meena * and *Mesha * meet. *Dakshina vishuva * is when *Kanyaa * and *Tulaa * are together. 



***Evam mahaakshe api aaroha avarohaabhyaam dve ayane raashi shatkam   
saardha trayodasha arksham cha kalpyam |*** In the same way, on top of the great wheel also, with increasing and decreasing orders, the two *ayanaas*, six *raashis*, and 13 and a half *nakshatraas * are to be imagined in the same way. 



***Yathaa mahaakshe dakshinottara chalanam tat anuroopam bhachakram cha tat   
sama antarikshe tiryak mukha nibaddham jnyeyam |*** Page **116** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **From the great axle, the southern and northern movements, and accordingly, at the same height in the sky, it is present downward facing. This is to be understood. 



***Tathaa raashi dvayam eka shashti mandalam cha bhuktam chet bhachakre api   
shashtaamsho raashi dvaya aatmakam saardha chatur nakshatram praak gatyaa   
bhotkavyam ityaadi oohyam |*** Similarly, two *raashis*, 61 *mandalaas*, which is one sixth of 366; four and a half *nakshatraas * with two *raashis*, are on the eastern side. 



The composition of the *nakshatraas, grahaas * are explained here. 



***Tat tat deshe chakra ardhasya darshana adarshanaabhyaam raashi shatkasya   
uditataa astamitataa cha |*** Six *raashis * are present each, the rising and setting of the *raashi shatka*, happens in the half *chakra*; the *mandalaas * are seen or not seen in *Uttaraayana, Dakshinaayana*. 



***Tatra praayasho meena meshou hrasvou, vrushabha kumbhou tato adhikou,   
nakra mithune kinchit deerghe, simha vrushchkou deerghatarou, \(karkichaapou   
deerghatamou\), dhanuh karkatou tato adhikou, same kanyaatule | ***The durations of the *raashis * are varying, *Meena * and *Mesha * are of small duration; *Vrushabha * and *Kumbha * are a little more; *Makara * and *Mithuna * are little more; *Simha * and *Vrushchika * are a little longer; *Dhanus * and *Karkata * are still longer; *Kanyaa * and *Tulaa * are equal. 



***Tatra arkaakraanta raashi amsham aarabhya shat raashi kshetra darshana   
kaala eva tatra deshe ahah; itara shatka darshana kaalo raatrih |*** When the Sun rises, whatever *raashi * is present, from that six *raashis*, up to that, is the day for that particular place. When the remaining six *raashis * are seen, that is night time. 



***Tat raashi pramaana adheenou dina raatri vruddhi hrasvou |*** Because the *raashis * are of unequal duration, the day and night are either longer or shorter, depending on what *raashis * are there during day and night. 



***Ityaadi jyotisshaastra sthitih cha puraana sammataa jnyeyaa |*** This is also acceptable as per the *Puraana*, and *Jyotisshaastra * also. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 8:   
Maanasottara shailasya poorvato vaasavee puree |   
Dakshine tu yamasyaanyaa prateechyaam varunasya cha |   
Uttarena cha somasya taasaam naamaani me shrunu ||*** On the east of the *Maanasottara parvata, Indra's * city is located. On the southern part is *Yama's * city. On the west, it is *Varuna's * city. On the north, it is *Soma's*. Listen to the Page **117** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **names of those cities. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Udayaadi sthaana vibhaaga pradarshanaaya aaha - maanasaa iti | ***Where the Sun rises and sets are shown. 



***Poorvata iti | Maanasottare merou cha pureenaam dik chatushkam brahma   
apekshayaa nitya nibaddham jnyeyam |*** With respect to *Brahma*, all these are established like this. The various cities are located with respect to *Maanasottara*, and the four directions are also established. ***   
Brahmano hi aadou srashtum sthitasya purodeshah poorvaa abhoot, paschaat   
bhaagah prateechee, dakshina hasta desho dakshinaa, itarahasta desha uttara   
iti |*** When *Brahma* starts to create, whatever is the place located in front of him, it became the eastern direction. Behind, it became west. On the right side, it became south; on the other side is the northern direction. 



***Tat niruktam yaaskena \* Deergha hasta prakrutih iti |*** This is also mentioned by *Yaaska*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 9:   
Vasvoukasaaraa shakrasya yaamyaa samyamanee tathaa |   
Puree sukhaa jaleshasya somasya cha vibhaavaree || ***The names of these cities are: *Indra's * city is called *Vasvoukasaaraa. Yama's * city is called *Samyamanee. Varuna's * city is called *Sukhaa. Soma's * city is called *Vibhaavaree*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 10:   
Kaashthaam gato dakshinatah kshipta ishuriva sarpati |   
Maitreya bhagavaan bhaanuh jyotishaam chakra samyutah || ***The Sun moves like an arrow thrown from a bow. Along with the *jyotischakra, graha **mandala*, he moves as though thrown like an arrow from a bow, towards the south. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kaashthaam gata iti | \* Atha tasya uparishthaat tu bhramato dakshinaayanam   
iti lainga ukteh indraadi pura upari gagane bhraman dakshina kaashthaam gato   
jyotischakra praantam gatvaa sheeghram \(bhramati\) | Kulaala chakra   
praantastho jantuh iva | ***When Sun is moving in front of *Indra's* city, in the front, on top, moving in the sky, when he reaches the southern tip, just like the wheel of a potter, when an insect is moving along the wheel, just like this, the Sun is moving. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 11: ***Page **118** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Ahoraatra vyavasthaana kaaranam bhagavaan ravih |   
Devayaanah parah panthaa yoginaam klesha samkshaye || ***Sun is only the cause of establishing the day and night. He is also the ultimate path for *yogis*, which is called *Devayaana*, when they get rid of all the *karmaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ahoraatra iti | Anho raatreh cha vyavashtaana kaaranam ravih janaih drushyo   
adrushyah san |*** The system of day and night is established by the Sun. Whenever the Sun is seen, it is day. When he is not seen, it is night. 



***Devayaanah archiraadih mukti maarga parvatvaat |*** *Devayaana * is called *Archiraadi maarga*, starts with *Archis*. This is the path followed by a liberated soul, when he goes to *Paramapada*. 



***Cchaandogye \* Te archishameva abhisambhavanti, archisho ahah ahna   
aapooryamaana paksham aapooryamaana pakshaat dyaan shat udanggeti   
maasaam taan maasebhyah samvatsaram samvatsaraat aadityam aadityaat   
chandramasam chandramaso vidyutam tat purusho amaanavah sa enaan brahma   
gaamayati esha vai devayaanah panthaah \* iti |*** It is told in *Chaandogye Upanishad*, they attain the *Archiraadi maarga*; these are all *Abhimaani devataas, Aativaahikaas*, who take the liberated souls through various *lokaas*, and then to *Paramapada. Archis abhimaani devataa*, then *Ahah **abhimaani devataa*, from there to the *Shukla paksha*, from there to the six months where the Sun moves towards north, the *Uttaraayana*; from the *Uttaraayana*, it is *Samvatsara*, then *Aaditya*, then *Chandramasa*, then the *Vidyut Purusha Amaanava*, will take him to *Brahma*, this is said to be the *Devayaana pantha*. Where those who do *Brahmopaasane * attain *Parabrahman*, going through this *Archiraadi maarga*; they never return back to *samsaara*. Sun is also the path maker for *Archiraadi*. 



***Atra cha uktah shlokah Archirdhrasro ardhamaasah sita udagayane the shat   
arkasya maasaah te abdo vaayu arka chandraah tatiti cha purushah shakra   
dhaatroh cha lokou | ***There is also a *shloka * which explains the same meaning. The day, *shukla paksha, **Uttaraayana*, the *Samvatsara*, then *Indra, Prajaapati*, their *lokaas*. 



***Vodhaaro vidyuto arvaak nayati tu purusho vaidyatah tebhyah oordhvam   
brahmajnyaana maanavo asmaat param iti kathayanti uttaram maargametam | ***Those who are not *Brahmajnyaanis * will go down. Those who are *Brahmajnyaanis * will go up and reach *Paramapada*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 12:   
Divasasya ravih madhye sarvakaalam vyavasthitah | ***Page **119** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sarva dveepeshu maitreya nishaardhasya cha sanmukhah ||*** During the day, he is located all the time in the centre. Even in midnight, he is located like this only, in all the *dveepaas*. 



Depending on whether he is seen or unseen in that particular place, it becomes day and night. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Divasasya iti | Divasyaya iti shloka chatushtayasya ayam bhaavah - Yathaa   
lakshocchritaa eva vyomni sthitah teekshna aatapah svaabito dviteeya yaama   
gamya desha bhaasakah san bhramati, tathaa sthita eva sva adhastya   
deshyaanaam madhyaahnakrut, tat sammukha samasootrastha bhachakraardha   
vyavahita uttara deshaanaam ardharaatrakrut, tathaa tat dina bhachakra   
paada vyavahita paschimadeshasthaih dooratvaat bhoolagna iva drushyamaana   
udeti iti vyapadeshah, taavat doorastha praak deshyaih dooreebhavat   
bhoolagna iva adrushyamaano astameti iti drushyah |*** Four *shlokaas * are explaining together this. One lakh *yojanaas * above in the sky, he is shining forth with fierce rays. He is moving towards the place he has to go next. Places which are located below him, he makes them experience as afternoon. Half of the *nakshatra mandala * is covered, in the other part where the Sun is not seen, the northern part becomes midnight. One fourth of the *nakshatra mandala*, which is covered, in the western part, because he is located at a great distance, it looks as though he is touching the ground; because of that, they feel that he is rising on the eastern sky. At the same time, at places on the eastern part, they see the Sun on the western side at a distance, as though touching the ground, they think that he is going down, that the sun is setting, not seeing the sun. 



***Udaye astamaye cha dooratvaat namrah, yathaa meghah sva adhasthaih   
unnatah tato doorasthaih bhoolagna iva drushyah |*** During sunrise and sunset both, because of the distance, it looks as though Sun is touching the ground, just as the clouds which are at a great distance, we feel as though they are touching the ground, and nearby we feel as though it is on top. 



***Evam lakshocchrita teekshna rashmeh merum pradakshinayata eva drashtru   
vashaat madhyaahnade vyavahaara iti |*** Sun, who is located one lakh *yojanaas * above, is going around the *Meru parvata*, from the point of view of people who are seeing him, how they see him because of distance, they call it as morning, afternoon, evening. 



***Tat udaahrutam vaayunaa "Madhyamah cha amaraavatyaam yaavat bhajati   
bhaaskarah | Vaivasvate samyamane udayah tatra drushyate | Sukhaayaam   
ardharaatrastho vibhaayaam astameti cha ||" ityaadi |*** *Vaayu Puraana* says that "When it is midday in *Amaraavati*, in *Samyamanee *Page **120** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***\(Yama's * city\) it is as though Sun is rising. In *Varuna's * city *Sukhaa*, it is midnight. In *Vibhaavaree*, it is said that the Sun is setting." 



***Ato dooratvaat eva adarshanam astamayah, na tu meruh vyavahitah |*** Because of distance only, Sun is not seen, and is said to be setting. Not because of being blocked by *Meru parvata*. 



***Meroh vyavadhaayakatve tu navakotimitam maanasottara paridhim ahoraatrena   
bhramato bhaanoh dvaatrimshat sahasra sammita merunaa aacchaadya   
maargasya kshana maatra gamyatvaat nityam raatreh alpatva prasango nityam   
eva eeshaanya vaayavyayoh eva udayaastamaya prasango dakshina   
kaashthaayaam aagneya nairutyayoh udayaastamaya siddhyartham prati aham   
aacchaadayka antara kalpanaa prasangah cha | ***Here, it is told why *Meru * is not blocking. Otherwise, in some areas always there will be light, always there will be rising, always seen as setting - these are all not logical, so it cannot be like that. 



***Ato dooratvaat eva adarshanam |*** The logic is that because of distance only, the Sun is not seen. 



***Tathaa aaha vaayuh \* Vidoora bhaavaat arkasya prodyatasya virashmitaa |   
Raktataa cha virashmitvaat raktatvaat cha api anushnataa || Rekhaayaam   
aasthitah sooryo yatra tatra cha drushyate | Oordhvam shata sahasraat tu   
yojanaanaam na drushyate || ***As told in *Vaayu Puraana*, because of distance, when Sun is rising, he does not seem to be having very fierce rays, he is quite pleasant at that time. Because rays are not shining forth like that, he seems to be having a reddish hue, because of this reddish hue he is not very burning. 



***Maatsye cha \* Vidoora bhaavaat arkasya bhoomeh lekhaagatasya cha |   
Heeyante rashmayo yasmaat tena raatrou na drushyate ||*** In *Maatsya Puraana* also, it is told that only because of distance, the night and day are there. Sun's rays are not experienced in the night. 



***Rekhaa tat dina bhramana vrutta chaturthaamshe drashtuh poorva aparayoh   
kalpitaa rekhaa, yatra bhoolagna iva graho drushyate |*** *Rekhaa * is an imagined line. 



***Shata sahasra shabdah cha bhaanu bhramana paridhi tureeyaamsha   
upalakshanam | Yat bhaagavate \* Yathaa cha indriyaah puryaah prachalati   
pancha dashabhih ghatikaabhih yaamyaam sapaada koti dvayam yojanaanaam   
saardha dvaadasha lakshaani saadhikaani cha upayaati, evam tato vaaruneem   
soumyaam aindreem cha punah, tathaa anye grahaah somaadayo nakshatraih ***Page **121** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****sah jyoutishchakre samaa abyudhyanti saha cha abhinimlochanti tena samudra   
teerasthaanaam drashtruunaam samudra salilam adhyaadivodyan anyeshaam tu   
bhuvam bhitveva udyannastam yaatvaa adrushyah param, na tu paramaarthato   
namratvam astamaayaadih vaa arkasya "Sa vaa esha na kadaachana astameti na   
udeti" iti shruteh | \* Vibhraraajamaanah sarirasya madhyaat \* Adbhyo vaa esha   
praatah udeti apah saayam pravishati iti mantra braahmanaani tu samudra   
velaa sthita drashtru pratibhaasa anuvaadena aaditya stuti paraani | ***In *Bhaagavata* also it is told how he moves around to *Indra's * city, *Yama's * city, *Varuna's * city, *Soma's * city. All the other planets, along with the stars, rise and set along with the Sun. Those who are located near the oceans, they see as though Sun is rising from the ocean, or setting in the ocean. Those who are away from the oceans, see as though it is rising from the land, or setting in the land. In reality, he is not touching the ground or ocean, it is because of distance, and people who perceive. *Shrutis * also say that he never sets or rises. In *Braahmana*, and in *Shruti * also, it is told that he enters into waters in the evening, and rises in the morning; this is to be taken as how those living near the ocean see the rising and setting; this is only praising the Sun. 



***Golaka aakaaraam bhuvam upari adhobhaagena pradakshinayato   
jyotishchakrasya ardham tatstha graha ashvam bhoomi ardham eva   
aacchaadayati tena udayaastamaya vaichitrya vyavasthitim vadanto jyotirvido   
api pouraanika reetyaa udayaastamaya vyvasthaa upapatteh bhoomeh golaka   
aakaaran upapatteh cha nirasyaah | Bhuvo hi golakaakaaratve samudra   
jalaanaam parito visrumaratva prasangah, sarit pravaahaa aadi niyama bhanga   
prasangah cha | Ato jyotisham prateeti anuguna ganita pradhaanam na atra   
pramaanam |*** If earth is round, all the waters will go away, it is told. This is not very reliable, as told in the commentary. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 13:   
Udayaastamaye cha eva sarva kaalam tu sammukhe |   
Vidishaasu tu asheshaasu tathaa brahman dishaasu cha ||*** The in between directions, north-east, south-east, etc., are called *vidiks*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 14:   
Yaih yatra drushyate bhaasvaan sa teshaam udayah smrutah |   
Tirobhaavam cha yatrraiti tatra evaah tat manam raveh ||*** Whoever sees the Sun there this is said as as rising. Who does not see there, it is said as setting. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 15:   
Na eva astam anarkasya na udayah sarvadaa satah |   
Udaya astamanaakhyam hi darshana adarshanam raveh || ***Page **122** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***Darshana* and *adarshana * are said to be the rising and setting of the Sun, whether they see the Sun, or not see the Sun. In reality, Sun does not rise or set as what we perceive here. It is by people seeing or not seeing that such things happen. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 16:   
Shakraadeenaam pure tishthan sprushati esha puratrayam |   
Vikonou dvou vikonashthah treen konaan dve pure tathaa ||*** He, being located on top of *Indrapuri*, he also touches three cities. When he is on top of the eastern direction, he touches the east, and then the north-eastern and south-eastern directions also. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha etaam eva dik chakra ardha vyaaptim udaaharati shakraadeenaam iti |   
Purena dik upalakshyaa, vikonena vidik, shakra aadi anyatamasya pura upari   
sthitah tat puradisham tat abhitah sthitam dik dvayam, anantaram vidishou cha   
sprushati | ***In the front is the direction; east, west, etc. are *dik*, and in between are *vidik*. In front and on top of the city of *Indra*, he is seen in that location in that city, as well as around that the two more directions, he is visible. Then, he also touches the directions in between the two directions. ***   
Evam aagneyaadi vidik samsthah taam vidisham tat abhitah sthitam dik dvayam   
anantaram vidik dvayam cha bhaasayati, ashta dik mandale ardham bhaasayati   
iti arthah |*** Being located on *Aagneya vidik* \(south-east\), and around that whatever two directions are located, he is visible there also. He is visible in the teo directions, and also the two in between directions. In the eight directions, he is visible in half the directions at any point of time. 



***Tat yathaa indrapuryaa oordhvam tishthan tatra madhyaahnam eesha   
konasthaanaam truteeyayaantam agni konasthaanaam agnyaamaantam yaamya   
purasthaanaam udayam soumya purasthaanaam astamayam karoti | ***On top of *Indrapuri*, it is *madhyaahna*. In the various directions, how it is rising, setting, how it is half way through, how it is one quarter of the day, it is the third quarter of the day, are told. 



***Evam agnivikonastha tatrasthaanaam madhyaahnam yayaa indrapuryoh aadya   
truteeya yaama antou nirrutireesha konayoh udaya astamayou, cha karoti |   
Evam sarva dik vidikshu yojyam | ***In *Nirruti * and *Eeshaanya*, how it is rising and setting, is told. In the same way, we have to imagine for all the directions and *vidiks*. 



These are all various movements of the Sun, rising and setting. Page **123** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 17:   
Udito vardhamaanaabhih aamadhyaanaat tapan ravih |   
Tatah param hasanteebhih goubhirastam nigacchati ||*** When he is rising, the Sun's rays are going on increasing till the midday, and then it reduces in intensity. And then, he sets in the evening. When the Sun is rising, till the afternoon, the brightness of Sun goes on increasing, his rays become more and more fierce and powerful. After that, it goes on reducing, and then he sets. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Udita iti | Gaavo rashmayah |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 18:   
Udayaastamanaabhyaam cha smrute poorva apare dishou |   
Yaavat purastaat tapati taavat prushte cha paarshvayoh || ***Because of the rising and setting only, the eastern and western directions are also recognized. The east and west directions are said to be because of the rising of the Sun and its setting. The Sun is always shining equally in all directions, front, back, sides, everywhere. As he is shining like that, he covers the main two directions, and the two sub-directions, and the inter-directions. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 19:   
Rute amara gireh meroh upari brahmanah sabhaam |   
Yeye mareechayo arkasya prayaanti brahmanah sabhaam |   
Tete nirastaah tat bhaasaa prateepam upayaanti vai || ***Rays which are moving up towards the *Brahma's * city, they are all reflected back. Except the city of *Brahman*, sitting on top of the *Meru parvata*; whichever ray tries to reach the city of *Brahma*, they are returned back. The brightness of *Brahman's * place is so much that the rays of the Sun are nothing compared to that. 





There are additional explanations of the Sun's movement and the various hues we see in the evening and morning. Lot more things will come about Surya Mandala, which we will see next. These have a lot to do with *Jyoutisha*. 



We are studying *Amsha * 2, Chapter 8. We were studying how day and night happen, the movement of the Sun, the eight directions, four main directions and four inter directions. How, when the Sun moves, what are the areas covered by the Sun, were explained. Page **124** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Udaya iti | Tat vruddhi hraasou aasatti viprakarsha kruta darshana   
adarshanaabhyaam | Udayena poorvaa dik, astamayena aparaa dik | Ata eva   
udyantam bhaasvantam pashyataam vaama dakshina bhaage sthitatvaat   
sarveshaam uttaro meruh lokaalokaachalah cha dakshinah syaat |*** Whenever the Sun is near, and when he is far away, the fierceness of Sun's rays are increasing or decreasing. When we see or don't see the Sun, the rising and setting are told. Wherever he is rising is the east direction. Wherever he is setting is identified as west. Because of that, whoever is seeing the Sun which is rising, for everyone, *Meru * is always on the north, and *Lokaalokaachala * is in the south. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 20:   
Tasmaat dishi uttasyaam vai divaa raatrih sadaa eva hi |   
Sarveshaam dveepa varshaanaam meruh uttarato yatah ||*** In the northern direction, there is always day and night. *Meru * is in the north of all the *varshaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tasmaat iti | Tasmaat dishi uttarasyaam nitya uttarasya meroh upari dik   
bhaage brahma sabhaa prabhayaa sadaa divaatvam, tatra arka prabhaa   
sanchaara abhaavaat nitya raatritva upachaarah |*** Always, *Meru parvata * is in the northern direction. The brightness of the Brahman's place is always shining on that, and so there is always day. Because the brightness of Brahman's place is so much, the Sun's rays are negligible and not even seen, they don't reach that place at all; so it is said to be night as Sun's rays don't reach there at all. This is *oupachaarika*, figuratively told. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 21:   
Prabhaa vivasvato raatrou astam gacchati bhaaskare |   
Vishati agmato raatrou vanhih dooraat prakaashate ||*** In the night when the Sun sets, the brightness of the Sun enters into fire; because of this, Agni, fire is burning bright from a distance. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 22:   
Vanheh prabhaa tathaa bhaanum dineshu aavishati dvija |   
Ateeva vanhi samyogaat atah sooryah prakaashate ||*** In the same way, brightness of *Agni * enters into Sun during the daytime. Because *Agni's * part has entered into the Sun in the morning, Sun is also burning bright. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 23:   
Tejasi bhaaskaraageneye prakaasha ushna svaroopinee | ***Page **125** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Paraspara anupraveshaat aapyaayete divaa nisham ||*** Brightness of Sun and *Agni*, which are *prakaasha * and *ushna*, they mutually enter into each, and because of that, they brighten the day and night. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha udaya astamaya nirnaya prasakta sandhyaa anusthaana agnihotreeya   
samsrushta homa prathama aahuti shesham \* Yasya vai dvou punyou gruhe   
vasata ityaadi braahmanam anugruhnaati - prabhaa vivasvata ityaadina |   
Prabhaa iti | Soorya prabhaayaah chaturthaamsho nishi agnim vishati \* prabhaa   
hi souree paadena iti vaayu ukteh; vanhi paadah tathaa iti sva ukteh cha |*** Day and night are decided connected to that. At that time, *Sandhyaavandanaa * and other *karmaas * are done. *Agnihotra * is done in the morning. The same point is told in *Taittiriya Braahmana*. It is said that the brightness of Agni enters into the Sun, and the brightness of Sun enters into *Agni*. So, in *Agnihotra*, when they offer *aahuti*, they offer to both the gods *Agni * and *Surya*. Because when there are two respectable people, if we show respect to one and do not show respect to the other, it is as if the person to whom you have shown respect also is direspected, because the other person was not shown due respect. So, both Agni and Surya should be given *aahuti*. In morning and evening, for both aahuti is to be given. In *Vaayu Puraana*, it is told that one fourth part of brightness of the Sun enters into *Agni * in the night. In the same way, one fourth part of the *Agni * also enters into the Sun. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 24:   
Dakshina uttara bhoomyarddre samutishthati bhaaskare |   
Ahoraatram vishati ambhah tamah prakaashya sheelavat ||*** One half of the earth, in the southern and northern parts, day and night, both are told. When the Sun sets, the night enters into water, or the day enters into water. 



When it is night time, the day enters into waters. When it is day, the night enters into water. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha ahoraatra sandhi prasangena tadanukaaricchaayaatapasandhistha   
vasateevareesamjnyta japa grahana shesham \* Yat vai divaa bhavati ityaadi   
braahmanam anugruhnaati dakshina uttara iti saardha dvi shlokyaam | Dakshina   
uttara iti | Tamah prakaashya iti atra kramo na vivakshitah | Tena meroh   
dakshina bhoomi arddhre ravou tishthati tamah sheelaavatee raatrirambho   
vishati, tadaa tatratyaanaam ahah syaat | Udak bhoomi arddhaste tu arke   
prakaashakatva sheelaam ahah apo vishati, dakshinasthaanaam tadaa raatrih   
syaat | ***Meeting point of day and night is *sandhyaa kaala*. At that time, *Vasateevari japa * is to be done, this also comes in *Taittiriya Samhitaa*. The southern half of *Meru parvata*, when the Sun is there; night which is having darkness, enters into water. At that time, Page **126** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **for people located there, it becomes day. When the Sun is in the northern half of the earth, day which is bright enters into water; at that time, those located in the southern part for them it is night. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 25:   
Aataamraa hi bhavanti aapo divaanakta praveshanaat |   
Divaa vishati cha eva ambho bhaaskare astamupeyushi |   
Tasmaat shuklaa bhavanti aapo naktam ahnah praveshanaat ||*** When the darkness enters into water, day happens, water becomes like a copper colour. When the Sun is setting, day enters into water, so waters are becoming white, shining. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aataamraa hi iti | Divaa dine, nakram raatrou |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 26:   
Evam pushkara madhyena yadaa yaati divaakarah |   
Trimshat bhaagam tu medinyaam tadaa mouhoortikee gatih || ***From the centre of the *Pushkara dveepa*, when the Sun is moving, 1/30 part of the earth, when the Sun covers, this is said to be one *muhoorta*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Evam iti | Evam ahoraatram kurvan pushkara madhyena maanasottara   
shikharena medinyaah ravi ratha chakra bhramana upalakshana manasottara   
madhya paridhikaayaa yah trimsho amshasya eka muhoorta gatih, tat vaayu   
uktam \* Nava kotyah prasankhyaataa yojanaih parimandalam | Tathaa shata   
sahasraani chatvaarimshah cha pancha cha || Ahoraatraat patangasya   
gatireshaa vidheeyate | Poornaa shata sahasraanaam eka trimshat tu saa   
smrutaa || Panchaashat tu tathaa anyaani sahasraani adhikaani cha ||   
Mouhoortikee gatih hi eshaa sooryasya tu vidheeyate | Madhyena   
pushkarasyaatha bhramato dakshinaayane || Evam udak kaashtaayaam shata   
dveepa uttaraantaparidhi trimshaamshah vishuve ksheeroda uttaraan taparidhi   
trimshaamsho dvou mouhoortikee gatih vaayu proktaadi prasiddhih jnyeyaa |*** When Sun is causing day and night, at the centre of the *pushkara*, on the *Manasottara **parvata*, the movement of chariot of Sun in a circular way, the central circumference of the *Manasottara parvata*, one-thirtieth part is said to be one *muhoorta*; this is told in *Vaayu Puraana*. The measure of the circumference is said to be 9 crore, 45 lakhs *yojanaas*. Sun covers this distance every day. One *muhoorta * is said to be 31 lakh, and 50,000 *yojanaas*. When this is multiplied by 30, we get 9 crore, 45 lakhs *yojanaas*, which is the complete circumference. In the centre of the *Pushkara*, he is going around during *Dakshinaayana*. From the northern end, he comes to the northern edge of the *Shatadveepa* in one *muhoorta*, and comes to the *Ksheeroda **parvata * in another *muhoorta*. Page **127** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 27:   
Kulaala chakra paryante bhraman esha divaakarah |   
Karoti ahah tathaa raatrim vimuncham medineem dvija ||*** A potter has got a wheel in which he makes the pot, and it is rotating. A small insect which is sitting on the edge of a wheel; in the same way, the Sun is rotating, in a circular manner. In the same way, he makes day and night for the earth. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kulaala chakra paryantam iti | Kulaala chakra praantastha jantuh   
iva jyotischakra paryantastho arko medineem praak uktaam maanaasaadri   
paridhikaam dakshina kaashtha aatmikaam vimunchan dakshina kaashthaantya   
dina apekshayaa vishamam ahoraatram cha kurvan uttarottaram maargam cha   
gacchan makaraadi raashi shatkam mahaakshastham tathaa praak gatyaa   
bhachakraardham cha yaati | ***Like an insect which is sitting at the edge of a wheel of a potter, he is located at the outer edge of the *nakshatra mandala*, the 9 crore, 45 lakhs *yojanaas* of circumference which was told, to the *Maanasaadri*; in the southern edge, on the last day of the *Dakshinaayana*, day and night are unequal, and he moves towards the northern direction; he enters *Makara * and six *raashis*. He moves in the eastern direction covering the six *raashis * starting with *Makara*, and half of the *nakshatra mandala*. This is located in the great axle, *mahaa aksha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 28:   
Ayanasya uttarasya aadou makaram yaati bhaaskarah |   
Tatah kumbham cha meenam cha raashe raashi antaram dvija ||*** In the northern half, he reaches *Makara raashi*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ayanasya uttarasya iti | Deva dina upakramatvaat makara praathamyam |   
Dhruvena hi pravahaanilena nityam pratyak bhraamyamaana jyotischakrastham   
arka bimbam dhruva rashmi gruheete mahaa akshe hrasva aksha yuga koti   
yantrita itara dhruva rashmi dvaya aakarshana vikarshana vashaat tat ayana   
anugunam udak dakshinato vaa ekaikaam mandala rekhaam aabhyantareem   
baahyaam vaa aarohaat avarohaat vaa tat itara bhramanena vruttam   
aabhyantaram meru aasanna baahyam maanasottara aasannam vaa   
sampaadayat tathaa eva makshatra chakre cha kinchit praak lambanena chalan   
maasena sapaada dvitaaraatmakam ekaikam raashim praak charan tryasheeti   
shata saavana dinaih taavat dvaaram bhraman mahaa akshe cha paraam   
kaashthaam sarpat bhachakre cha saardha trayodasharksha aatmakam raashi   
shatkam soura shanmaasaih bhunkte; evam shat shashti trishata ahoraatraih dvi   
ayana shat rutu dvaadasha maasa raashi roopa kaala ekah sourah abdah syaat |   
Tatra tu shat shashti tri shata vaaram pratyak bhramana udaya astamayaa; ***Page **128** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****mahaa akshe cha eka vaaram aaroha avarohou rathasya eka vaaram cha   
bhachakre vailomyena praak gatyaa sapta vimshati nakshatra aatmaka   
dvaadasha raashi chakra bhoga roopam arkasya ekam viloma bhramanam   
bahuvaaram pratyak bhramati yat kulaala chakrasthasya tat vilomam   
bhramatah keetasyeva syaat | Evam chakra vashaat nityam pratyak gatih   
svaatantryaat praak gatih cha sarveshaam grahaanaam | Bhoumaadeh tu   
kadaachit arkaat dooratvaat vakraa cha gatih pratyak api syaat |   
Chandraadeenaam cha arkasattou tat rashmi abhibhooteh astamayoh arka   
mandala praveshaakhyah tat vipra karshaat udaya ityaadi shruti puraana   
aviruddham, jyotisshaastraat jnyeyam | Idam tu souraabdasya shat shashti tri   
shata ahoraatravattvam; sampratam him kalou sa shata chatushke   
chatussahasre abdaanaam sapaada pancha shashti tri shata dinasya   
souraabdasya pratyaksha aadi prasiddeh |*** *Makara raashi* is said to be the start of *deva dina*, he covers six *raashis * during the day. *Dhruva * is holding through the reins made of *Vaayu*. This *jyotischakra * is rotating in the western direction. In the great axle, being held by the reins by *Dhruva*, the smaller axle and yoke are connected to other pair of *rashmis*. The two reins, by pulling towards and pulling against, according to *Dakshinaayana * and *Uttaraayana*, either to the northern direction or southern direction, one *mandala rekhaa * at a time, either the top or bottom portion, going up and going down, he is going round and covering the entire circumference. Inside part is near *Meru*, and outside part is near *Maanasottara*. Slowly, he is moving towards the eastern direction. In one month, he covers two and a quarter *nakshatraas*, which is one *raashi*. 183 solar days, he moves around in the same way. He will reach the edge on the great axle; and in the *nakshatra mandala*, thirteen and a half *nakshatraas*, six *raashis*, he covers this much distance. In this way, 366 days \(includes nights\), two *ayanaas*, six *rutus*, twelve months - one solar year is divided like this. In this 366 times, the rising and setting in the western direction happens. Once on the great axle he goes up and down, 27 *nakshatraas*, 12 *raashis*, the potters wheel is rotating, and insect is rotating opposite; in the same way, the Sun's movement is happening. Covering the *nakshatra **mandala*, daily moving in the western direction, and in the other direction, he moves by himself, the planets also move like that. Mars, *Angaaraka*, is located at a distance from the Sun; it can happen in the other direction also. Moon and others which are near the Sun, are being covered by the rays of the Sun; rising and setting of the moon happen because of the nearness to the Sun. It is said to enter into Sun's mandala, during the setting of the moon, and is *chandrodaya * happens when the Sun is at a distance; this is all told in *Shruti * and *Puraana*, which is not opposed to what is told here; and can be learnt from the *Jyotisshaastra*. *Sri Engal Aalwaan * makes and interesting remark here - The current year when this commentary was written, he is saying that there are 366 days now, and according to the *Kali * measure, 4,400 years, 365 and a quarter days. 



Now, it is 5120 after *Kali Yuga. Sri Engal Aalwaan's * time is second half of the twelfth Page **129** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **century; that may come to around 4,250 after *Kali*. He is saying that the explanation given in *Vishnu Puraana* and what he sees are matching. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 29:   
Trishu eteshu atha bhukteshu tato vaishuvateem gatim |   
Prayaati savitaa kurvan ahoraatram tatah samam |*** *Vishuva * is the middle part of *Dakshinaayana * or *Uttaraayana*. He makes the day and night equal. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Trishu iti | Vaishuvateem kaashthayoh madhyagaam; tatah tatra vishuvaadye   
dine ahnaa raatreh cha saamyam | Tatra cha meshastha arka udayaat meshaadi   
shat raashi udaya kaalah trimshat naadyo dinam; evam tulaa aadi shat raashi   
udaya kaalo raatrih | Vishuvaantare pitrudaivatye api vaipareetyena trimshat   
naadeetvam vishuvasandheh param yaavat raashi trayam bhaanoh dinam   
trimshat naadeebhyo vardhate, karkataadi yaavat tulam tatvruddhasya   
hraasah, tulaadou trimshato hraasah, nakraadou tat ghraasasya poortih yaavat   
mesham iti |*** When the Sun rises, the *Mesha raashi* is there. From here, six *raashis * will cover 30 *naadis*. In the same way, starting from *Tulaa raashi*, six *raashis * are said to be night. In between the *vishuvaas*, how the day and night increase and decrease is being told - the durations, space covered by the *raashis * are said to be different. We saw earlier that *Meena * and *Mesha * are small, so it takes less time to cover the two *raashis **Meena * and *Mesha*. *Vrushabha * and *Kumbha * are a little more than that, so that it takes more time for the Sun to cover these two. *Makara * and *Mithuna * are still more. *Simha * and *Vruschika * are still longer. *Dhanus * and *Karkataka * are longer. *Kanya * and *Tula * are equal. Based on this, whichever *raasi * is at the day beginning, the day and night durations keep changing. This is why we see differences in duration of day and night. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 30:   
Tato raatrih kshayam yaati vardhate anudinam dinam ||   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 31:   
Tatah cha mithunasya ante paraam kaashthaam upaagatah |   
Raashim karkatakam praapya kurute dakshinaayanam ||*** At *Karkataka, Dakshinaayana * starts. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 32:   
Kulaala chakra paryanto yathaa sheeghram pravartate |   
Dakshina prakrame sooryah tathaa sheeghram pravartate ||*** Just as the outer circumference of the potter's wheel is moving very fast, when Sun is approaching the *Dakshinaayana* he is moving very fast. Page **130** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kulaala chakra iti | Dakshina upakrame tat kaashtha aagamane |*** When he is going towards *Dakshinaayana*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 33:   
Ativegitayaa kaalam vaayu vega gatih charan |*** ***Tasmaat prakrushtaam bhoomim tu kaalena alpena gacchati ||*** Moving at the speed of *Vaayu*, he covers that part of the earth, very fast, in very little time. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ativegitayaa iti | Prakrushtaam bhoomim mahaa vrutta roopaam chakra ardha   
medineem | ***





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 34:   
Sooryo dvaadashabhih shaighryaat muhoorte dakshinaayane |   
Trayodashaardhamrukshaanam ahnaa tu charati dvija |   
Muhoortaih taavat drukshaani naktam ashtaadashaih charan || ***Sun moves very fast in *Dakshinaayana*, he covers thirteen and a half *nakshatraas * in 12 *muhoortaas*. And in the night, he needs 18 *muhoortaas * to cover. So, nights are longer. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Etat eva udaaharan prapanchayati - sooryo dvaadashabhih ityaadinaa | ***





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 35:   
Kulaala chakra madhyastho yathaa mandam prasarpati |   
Tathaa udak ayane sooryah sarpate manda vikramah ||*** In between the outer circumference and inner nave, that is half way through the radius, if the Sun is located in such a position, he goes slower than when he is located in the outer circumference. His movement becomes slower and slower as he moves towards the centre. In the same way, in *Uttaraayana*, he moves slowly. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kulaala chakra madhyasthah iti | Chakra madhyasthasya - naabhi nemyoh   
antaraala sthitah |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 36:   
Tasmaat deerghena kaalena bhoomim alpaam tu gacchati |   
Ashtaadasha muhoortam yat uttaraayana paschimam ||*** He takes longer time to cover the day in *Uttaraayana*. In *Uttaraayana*, days are longer, 18 *muhoortaas * are required. Page **131** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tasmaat iti | Alpaam - abhyantara vruttaargha roopaam bhoomim gacchati |   
Uttaraayana paschimam - praanta dinam dakshinaayanaadyahah cha samam |   
Dina raatri vyavahaarasya arkayattatvaat taavat muhoortaih taavanti   
nakshatraani ravih charati iti upachaarah | Raveh darshana adarshana   
kaalaabhyaam taavat sankhya nakshatra udaya iti arthah | Hrasva raashi   
shatkastha bhachakra ardha udaya kaalasya dinatvaat tasya dvaadasha   
muhoortatvam tat vyatyayaat ashtaadasha muhoortatvam raatreh | Udak   
kaashtaayaam dina nisha urmaana vyatyayah, madhye tu asampaataat vruddhi   
hraasou | Imou cha adhikou vruddhi hraasou puraana pranetru nivaasa bhoota   
kuru naimisha kaashmeera aadi desha vishayou, yat deshe vishuvit dina   
madhyaahne dvaadasha angulasya shankoh saardha ashta anguli praaya   
aacchaayaa syaat | Sarva desheshu api vishuvata udak kaashtaa sthite tu arke   
arkasya purastha raashi shatka udaya kaala baahulyaat dinadairghyam | Tat   
paaschaatya raashi shatka udaya kaala alpatayaa raatri alpatvam tat   
vaipareetyam dakshina kaashthaah te |*** The movement of the Sun is what decides the day and night. Based on this, we say that he covers so many *muhoortaas * in so many *nakshatraas*, *raashis*; this is only figurative, *oupachaarika*. The durations for which we see the Sun and don't see the Sun, accordingly we count the *nakshatraas* covered in the particular time. The *raashis * which are of smaller duration, *Meena, Mesha, Vrushabha, Kumbha *- whenever these *raashis * are coming in the beginning of the day, the days are smaller, and nights are longer. In *Uttaraayana*, the days are longer. All these things - increase and decrease in day and night duration - are seen by the works of *Puraanaas, Pouraanikaas* who lived in *Kuru, Naimishaaranya, Kaashmira*; in these places they have a 12 inch nail, when the see the image of this, this is 8.5 inches in the mid day, 12 noon of *vishuvat dinam*, mid day of *Dakshinaayana * or *Uttaraayana*. In *Uttaraayana*, the other half *raashis * are coming - *Makara, Simha, Vrushchika *- because of this, Sun takes longer to cover; these days are longer. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 37:   
Ahah bhavati \(tatra api tapate\) tat cha api charate manda vikramah |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 38:   
Trayodashaardham ahnaa tu rukshaanaam charate ravih |   
Muhoortaih taavadrukshaani raatrou dvaadashabhih charan ||*** To cover 13.5 *nakshatraas*, he needs 18 *muhoortaas * during the day, as he is said to be moving slower; and only 12 *muhoortaas * during the night, in the *Uttaraayana*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 39:   
Ato mandataram naabhyaam chakram bhramati vai yathaa |   
Mrut pinda iva madhyastho dhruvo bhramati vai tathaa ||*** Page **132** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **In the *naabhi*, nave, the movement is still slower. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ata iti | Kulaala chakra madhyastho mrut pinda iva jyotischakra madhyastho   
dhruvah kulaa chakram yathaa naabhou mandam bhramati tathaa bhramati | ***Just as a potters wheel is moving very slowly at the nave, in the same way, *Dhruva * is also rotating like that, as he is located at the centre of the nave. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 40:   
Kulaala chakra naabhih tu yathaa tatra eva vartate |   
Dhruvah tathaa hi maitreya tatra eva parivartate ||*** *Dhruva * is located at the nave. Wherever he is there, he is rotating there itself. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ato dhruvo bhraman api na naabhim tyajati iti aaha - kulaala chakra naabhih tu   
iti |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 41:   
Ubhayoh kaashthayoh madhye bhramataa mandalaani tu |   
Divaa naktam cha sooryasya mandaa sheeghraa cha vai gatih || ***Between the two *Dakshinaayana* and *Uttaraayana * ends, and the *mandalaas*, the Sun is rotating, the day and night are happening because of longer or shorter. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Nakshatra muhoorta vashaat uktam eva ahoraatra vaichitryam raashi   
vashaat prapanchayati - ubhayoh ityaadinaa |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 42:   
Manda ahni yasmin nayane sheeghraa naktam tadaa gatih |   
Sheeghraa nishi yadaa cha asya tadaa mandaa divaa gatih ||*** Based on the *raashis*, whether the movement is slower of faster, during the day, the days are shorter or longer. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 43:   
Eka pramaanam eva esha maargam yaati divaakarah |   
Ahoraatrena yo bhunkte samastaa raashayo dvija ||*** He is covering all the *raashis*, day and night, in the same way. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 44:   
Shat eva raasheen yo bhunkte raatrou anyaam cha shat divaa ||*** He covers 6 *raashis * in the night, and 6 in the day. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ***Page **133** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Etat cha ahoraatra gati vaishamyam dvaadasha raashi udaya kaalena eka   
roopam bhramato api arkasya raashi udaya kaala vaishamya krutam iti aaha eka   
pramaanam iti aadinaa | Eka pramaanam iti | Samastaa raashaya iti   
dviteeya arthe prathamaa | ***The differences in day and night, Sun is moving in the same way. But depending on the *raashi * which is covered, and the time required to cover that *raashi*, the duration becomes long or short. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 45:   
Raashi pramaana janitaa deergha hrasva aatmataa dine |   
Tathaa nishaayaam raasheenaam pramaanaih laghu deerghataa ||*** Based on the measure of the *raashi * only, the day duration and night duration, is either long or short. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 46:   
Dinaadeh deergha hrasvatvam tat bhogena eva jaayate |   
Uttare prakrame sheeghraa nishi mandaa gatih divaa ||*** The time required to cover them, being long or short, day and night. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dinaadeh iti | Tat bhogena shat raashi vyaapta chakra pradeshasya parivartana   
roopena bhogena | Tat vaishamyam cha bhachakra samsthaana vaishamyaat   
drushta adrushtyaakraanta desha bhedaat cha | Tat ganitaikagamyam | Idam tu   
iha uddeshatah sujnyaanam yat drashtuh drushti abhito vishuvat vrutta   
paadaantagam graham gocharayati | Tena vishuvat vruttaardha drushteh dina   
raatri saamyam tatah adhika alpayoh yaamya soumya vruttayoh drushya   
amshasya vishuvat paada tulya sva paada apekshayaa alpatva mahatvaabhyaam   
dina hraasa vruddhee iti agneesha vidhoshorudayoh upapattih cha |*** One *raashi * is 2 and a quarter *nakshatraas*. The space required to cover that distance. Whatever we see the movement of the Sun, it depends on that. We see that the Sun sets at a particular time, and covers the day very fast in *Dakshinaayana*. In *Uttaraayana*, he takes longer to cover the day. This is known through all the calculations in *Jyotisshaastra*. At the middle of *Uttaraayana * and *Dakshinaayana, **vishuvat * is when day and night are equal. The various cities were told earlier -*Indra's, Yama's, Varuna's, Soma's, Vibhaavari's*, etc. Different cities have different timings because of this only. 



Now, another important aspect is going to be explained - what happens between day and night. Night is told as *Usha * in *Vedaas. Vyushti * is said to be day. The last time, at the end of the night is *Usha kaala*. The beginning of the day is *Vyushti*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 47:   
Dakshine tu ayane saa eva vipareetaa vivasvatah || ***Page **134** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 48:   
Ushaa raatrih tamaakhyaataa vyushtischa uchyate dinam |   
Prochyate cha tathaa sandhyaa ushaa vyushtyoh yadantaram ||*** The meeting time of day and night is said to be *Sandhyaa kaala*. Night and day - as told in the *Shrutis*, using those terminologies, *Ushaa * and *Vyushti, **Sri Paraasharar * is telling. The meeting time of that - day and night, is said to be *Sandhyaa kaala*. 



Importance of *Sandhyaa kaala*, why *Sandhyaavandana * is to be done, why *arghya * is to be given, what happens during giving of *arghya*, are going to be explained now. We will see next. 



We are studying *Amsha * 2, Chapter 8. We saw how based on the movement of the Sun in the various directions, they perceive dawn, setting, etc. based on their views, locations, though Sun is always shining and rotating. Also, in *Uttaraayana * and *Dakshinaayana*, how the duration of the day and night changes, was also explained. 



Next, *Sri Paraasharar * is going to tell the importance of *Sandhyaa kaala*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha dina raatri sandhi prasaktyaa \* Raatrih vaa ushaa ahah vyashtih iti shruti   
ukta naamnaa dina raatri vyavahaara sampaadanaartham sandhyaam prastouti   
- ushaa iti |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 49:   
Sandhyaa kaale cha sampraapte roudre parama daarune |   
Mandehaa raakshasaa ghoraah sooryam icchanti khaaditum || ***It is told in the *Shruti * that when the *Sandhyaa kaala * approaches, it is a very fierce time, very dangerous; there are *raakshasaas * by name *Mandehaas*, who are coming to eat the Sun. This is told in the *Taittiriya Aaranyaka * in the second *Prashna*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
\* Rakshaamsi ha vaa puraa anuvaaka, ityaadi svaadhyaaya braahmanam   
anugruhnaati sandhyaa kaale tu iti |*** The second *prashna * of *Taittiriya Aaranyaka * is called *Svaadhyaaya Braahmana*. When the *arghya * is given in *Sandhyaa kaala*, it throws the *Mandeha raakshasaas * away. It is told that one has to do *Sandhyaavandana * during that time, one has to give *arghya*, with the *Gaayatri Mantra*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 50: ***Page **135** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Prajaapati krutah shaapah teshaam maitreya raakshasaam |   
Akshaytvam shareeraanaam maranam cha dine dine ||*** The *Mandeha raakshasaas * have a curse from *Prajaapati*, that their bodies never deteriorate, but they die every day. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 51:   
Tatah sooryasya taih yuddham bhavati atyanta daarunam |   
Tato dvijottamaah toyam sankshipanti mahaa mune ||*** Because of that, everyday they go and fight with *Surya*, and try to swallow him. At that time, all the *braahmanaas, shreshthaas * give the *arghya*, chanting the *Gaayatri **mantra*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 52:   
Omkaara brahma samyuktam gaayatryaa cha abhimantritam |   
Tena dahyanti te paapaa vajreebhootena vaarinaa || ***That water becomes like a *Vajraayudha*, those sinners are burnt with that. With the *mantra Gaayatri*, it is made sacred. With the the *Vyaahrutis * and the *Gaayatri **mantra, braahmanaas * give *arghya * during *Sandhyaa kaala*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Omkaara brahma samyuktam iti | Brahma trayee saaram vyaahruti trayam |*** *Trayee * is *Vedaas*, and *trayee saara * is the essence of the three *Vedaas*, as told in the three *Vyaahrutis, Bhooh, Bhuvah, Suvah*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 53:   
Agnihotre hooyate yaa samantraa prathama aahutih |   
Sooryo jyotih sahasraamshuh tathaa deepyati bhaaskarah ||*** There is a *mantra * in the *Vedaas, Sooryo jyotih*, and with that, they do *Agnihotra*. The first *aahuti * given during *Agnihotra*, the Sun is shining forth with that. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Agnihotra iti | \* Sooryo jyotiriti praatah homa mantra prateeka uktih   
sandhyayoh dvayoh tat upaasti anantaram agnihotram vidhaatum | ***The *homa * done morning and evening, they first do *Sandhyaavandana * and then do *Agnihotra*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 54:   
Omkaaro bhagavaan vishnuh tridhaamaa vachasaam patih |   
Tat ucchaaranah te tu vinaasham yaanti raakshasaah ||*** *Omkaara * connotes *Parabrahma * itself, *Parabrahma * is *pratipaadya * by *Pranava*. He is the Lord of *vaak*, speech. He lives in three places. By this *ucchaarana*, by the *braahmanaas*, the *Mandeha raakshasaas* get destroyed. 



Page **136** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Omkaara iti | Tridhaamaa vyaahruti devataa agni vaayu soorya traya   
aashrayah | ***He is resorted to by three gods, *Agni, Vaayu, Soorya*, who are *abhimaani devataas * of the three *Vyaahrutis, Bhooh, Bhuvah, Suvah*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 55:   
Vaishnavo amshah parah sooryo yo antarjyotih asamplavam |   
Abhidaayaka omkaarah tasya tat prerakam param ||*** *Omkaara * is *abhidaayaka*, denotes *Paramaatman*, He is the *antarjyoti*, He is also there in the *Surya Mandala*, He is without any *vikaara. Surya * is part of *Vishnu, **Vaishnavaamsha*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vaishnavo amsha iti | Tasya vaishnavaamshasya, omkaarah prerakah - kaarya   
unmukhatvaat bodhakah yasya tat prerakam | Yat vaa tat omkaaraakhyam   
brahma tasya jyotishah prerakah |*** *Surya * is said to be part of *Vishnu*, that *Vaishnavaamsha * is impelled by *Vishnu, **Omkaara*. He fights with the *raakshasaas*, and with the power of the *Gaayatri **mantra * and water thrown, he destroys the *raakshasaas*. Or, *Omkaara * itself is *Parabrahman*, He is the *preraka * for the Sun's *jyoti*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 56:   
Tena sampreritam jyotih omkaarenaah cha deeptimat |   
Dahati ashesha rakshaamsi mandehaakhyaani aghaani vai ||*** Being impelled by *Paramaatman*, he shines forth brightly, and with that strength, and fierce shining rays, *tejas*, he destroys the *raakshasaas*. *Mandeha raakshasaas * are said to be sinners. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tena iti | Aghaani paapishtaani |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 57:   
Tasmaat na ullanghanam kaaryam sandhyopaasana karmanah |   
Sa hanti sooryam sandhyaayaa na upaastim kurute tu yah ||*** All these powers which the Sun gets, at the time of *Sandhyaa kaala*, is because of the *Vyaahruti traya*, and along with that the *Gaayatri mantra*, which is said, to offer the *arghya*. Because of this, he gets the strength and *tejas * to fight the *raakshasaas * and destroy them. Otherwise, he will be in trouble. This is why the *Sandhyaavandana karma * ordained by the *Shrutis*, one should not transgress. 



It is told very clearly in the *Shruti * that one has to do *Sandhyaavandana*, it is a *vidhi*. 



Page **137** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tasmaat iti | Sa hanti sooryam iti asya tat akaranaja paapakshayaartho   
sandhyopaasih avashyam kaarya iti eva arthah | ***One who does not do the *Sandhyopaasanaa * at the *Sandhyaakaala*, he kills the Sun, it is told; the meaning of this is in order to not be tainted by sins that accrue because of not doing *Sandhyaavandana karma*, one has to to *Sandhyaavandana*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 58:   
Tatah prayaati bhagavaan braahmanaih abhirakshitah |   
Vaalakhilyaadibhih cha eva jagatah paalanaa udyatah ||*** The Sun, being protected by the *braahmanaas*, and *rishis * like *Vaalakhilya*, goes ahead to protect the whole world. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 59:   
Kaashthaa nimeshaa dasha pancha chaiva trimshat cha kaashthaa   
ganayetkalaam taam |   
Trimshat kalaah cha eva bhavet muhoortah taih trimshataa raatri ahanee   
samete ||*** Now, *Paraasharar * is telling the division of time. This is to know the best time for performing *yaagaas*. 15 *nimeshaas * are said to be one *kaashtha*. 30 *kaashthaas * are one *kalaa*. One *muhoorta * is made of 30 *kalaas*. 30 *muhoortaas * are included in one day, inclusive of day and night. 



So, 15 *muhoortaas * during the day, and 15 *muhoortaas * in the night. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sandhyaa kaala iyatta aajnyaapanartham aaha - kaashthaa iti |*** In order to know the duration of *Sandhyaa kaala*, the time divisions are told. At what time one has to do *Sandhyaavandana*, how much duration is *Sandhyaa kaala *- for all this, the divisions of time are to be known. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 60:   
Hraasavruddhee tu ahah bhaagaih divasaanaam yathaa kramam |   
Sandhyaa muhoorttamaatraa vai hraase vruddhou samaa smrutaa || ***The daytime is longer in the *Uttaraayana * and shorter in the *Dakshinaayana*; as was told earlier. The duration of day and night keeps changing - shortening and increasing. Whatever this be, the *Sandhyaa kaala * is said to be one *muhoorta * always, whether it is during the longer days or shorter days. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Hraasavruddhee iti | Ahah bhaagaih - muhoortaih saha divasaanaam   
hraasavruddhee | Ahni trimshat naadibho vivruddhe tat pancha dasho amsho   
muhoorto vardhate, ksheene ksheeyate | Evam raatrou cha iti arthah | Uktam ***Page **138** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****cha - \* Ahna pancha dashaamsho raatreh cha eva muhoorta iti sanjyeti |   
Sandhyaa muhoortah tu ardha udayaanta ardha astamayaadih cha dvi naadi   
maatra eva | Yathaa aaha gargah - \* Dvinaadikaa bhavet sandhyaa yaavat   
jyotih pradarshanam | Varaahamihirah cha \* Ardha astamita abhyuditaat   
sooryaat asprushtabham nabho yaavat taavat sandhyaa kaalah iti | *** Along with the *muhoortaas * of the day, the day is either increasing or decreasing in duration. Each *muhoorta * is made of 2 *naadis*; with 30 *naadis*, when the day is longer, one-fifteenth part of day, which is *muhoorta * also becomes longer; in the same way, when the day becomes shorter, the *muhoorta * duration also becomes shorter. Same way in the night also. It is said - one-fifteenth part of the day, and also night, is said to be *muhoorta*. The *Sandhyaa muhoorta*, which is at *Sandhyaa kaala*, one *muhoorta*, is always 2 *naadis*; half of the *muhoorta * is the end of the day, and half when the night starts. In 15 *muhoortaas * of the day, the latter half of the 15th *muhoorta*, and the first half of the 1st *muhoorta * of the night, is the *Sandhyaa kaala*, is one *muhoorta. Garga Rishi * has told - *Sandhyaa kaala * consisting of 2 *naadis*, when the Sun is being seen. *Varaahamihira * also says - The Sun which has risen, sun which has set, half of that, each part, becomes one *muhoorta*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 61:   
Rekhaa prabhruti yathaa aaditye trimuhoorta gate ravou |   
Praatah smrutah tatah kaalo bhaagah cha ahnah sa panchamah ||*** 15 *muhoortaas * in a day are divided in 5 parts of 3 *muhoortaas * each. The first three *muhoortaas * are said to be *praatah kaala*. This is one-fifth part of the day. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Rekhaa prabhruti iti | Rekhaa shabdena udayo lakshyah | ****Rekhaa * means sunrise. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 62:   
Tasmaat praatah tanaat kaalaat tri muhoortah tu sangavah |   
Madhyaahnah trimuhoortah tu tasmaat kaalaat tu sangavaat || ***After *praatah kaala*, 3 *muhoortaas * is said to be *Sangava kaala*. From *Sangava*, another 3 *muhoortaas * is said to be *madhyaahna*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 63:   
Tasmaat maadhyaahnikaat kaalaat aparaahna iti smrutah |   
Traya eva muhoortaah tu kaala bhaagah smruto budhaih ||*** From *Maadhyaahnika kaala*, 3 *muhoortaas * is said to be *aparaahna*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 64:   
Aparaahne vyateete tu kaalah saayahna eva cha |   
Dasha pancha muhoortaahe muhoortaah traya eva cha ||*** The next 3 *muhootaas * are said to be *Saayaahna*. With 15 *muhoortaas * in a day, each Page **139** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **part is 3 *muhoortaas * told. 



The day is divided into five parts - the first 3 *muhoortaas * are *Praatah kaala*; then comes *Sangava kaala*; then comes *Madhyaahna*; then *Aparaahna*; then *Saayaahna*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aparaahne iti | Muhoortaah traya eva cha saayaahna iti poorvena anvayah |   
Idam cha dasha pancha muhoortaahe pancha dasha muhoorte ahni, praatah aadi   
panchaasha kalpanam iti sheshah | Dasha pancha muhoortaa vai iti cha paathah   
| Dasha pancha muhoortaah cha iti paathe vishuve pancha dasha dhruva bhootaa   
muhoortaah | Ayanoyoh tu vruddhi hraasa yogino muhoortaah traya eva iti   
sangraha uktih | ***Evening 3 *muhoortaas * is *Saayaahna*. 15 *muhoortaas * in a day, have to be counted starting from *Praatah*. In the *Uttaraayana * as well as *Dakshinaayana*, the *muhoortaas * are said to be three *muhoortaas * only \(for *Praatah kaala*\), but the day may be longer or shorter. In *Vishuva*, the day and night are equal, so *muhoortaas * also will become equal. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 65:   
Dasha pancha muhoortam vai ahah vaishuvatam smrutam || ***



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dasha pancha muhoortam iti | Vishuva dina ahah maana naadi trimshat   
chaturvimshati anta hraaso yaamye ayane, soumye tu shat trimshat antam   
vruddhih iti arthah | ***It is told how it becomes shorter and longer in *Uttaraayana * and *Dakshinaayana*, etc. Till the 24th *muhoorta*, it goes on reducing, and up to 36, it is increasing. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 66:   
Vardhate hrasate cha eva api ayane dakshinottare |   
Ahah tu grasate raatrim raatrih grasati vaasaram ||*** In *Dakshinaayana * and *Uttaraayana*, the days and nights decrease and increase. In *Uttaraayana*, days are longer. In *Dakshinaayana*, nights are longer. The day is said to eat into the night, during *Uttaraayana*; and during *Dakshinaayana*, night is said to eat into day. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 67:   
Sharat vasantayoh madhye vishuvam tu vibhaavyate |   
Tulaa meshagate bhaanou sama raatri dinam tu tat ||*** In between *Sharat Rutu * and *Vasanta Rutu*, the middle part is said to be *Vishuva*. These are *Tulaa raashi * and *Meshaa raashi*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ***Page **140** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sharat iti | Sharat madhyam tulaa aarambhah, vasanta madhyam mesha   
aarambhah, sah vishuvat madhyamaargah |*** In the middle of *Sharat Rutu, Tulaa raashi * starts. In the middle of *Vasanta, **Meshaa * starts. This is the middle part of the *Ayana*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 68:   
Karkate avasthite bhaanou dakshinaayanam uchyate |   
Uttaraayanam api uktam makarasthe divaakare ||*** When the Sun is in *Karkata*, it is said to be starting of *Dakshinaayana*. When it is in *Makara*, it is said to be starting of *Uttaraayana*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 69:   
Trimshat muhoortam kathitam ahoraatram tu yat mayaa |   
Taani pancha dasha brahman paksha iti abhidheeyate ||*** Whatever was told by *Sri Paraasharar*, 30 *muhoortaas*, in a day and night put together - 15 such days is said to be one *paksha*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha sooryagati prasaktyaa tat saadhya pancha abda maya yuga jnyaapanaaya   
aaha trimshat iti | Trimshat muhoortena saavana dinena souradinam lakshyam |   
Pakshaha cha atra souro ardha maasah | Soura panchaabdatvaat yugasya rutuh   
eka shashtih saavana dinam \* eka ahashtih aho raatram rutuh eko vibhaavyate,   
iti vaayu ukteh |*** Based on the movement of the Sun, every five years, is said to be one *yuga*; this is going to be explained. 30 *muhoortaas * is told as *Saavana Dina*, one *Soura Dina*. Half of *Soura maasa * is is a *paksha. Chaandra, Saavana, Soura, Naakshatra*, are the four kinds of *maasaas * which are told. *Saavana maasa * is 30 days. *Soura maasa * is from *sankramana * to *sankramana*, sun entering into a particular star. *Amavasya * to *Amavasya * is said to be *Chaandra maasa*. Based on the position of the *Chandra mandala*, is the *Naakshatra maasa*. 5 years consisting of *Souraas*, is said to be 1 yuga. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 70:   
Maasah paksha dvayena ukto dvou maasou cha arkajou rutuh |   
Rutu trayam cha api ayayanam dve ayane varsha sanjnite ||*** 2 *pakshaas * form a month. 2 such months are said to be one *rutu*. 3 *rutus * is said to be one *ayana*. 2 *ayanaas * are called as one *varsha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 71:   
Samvatsaraadayah pancha chaturmaasa vikalpitaah |   
Nischayah sarva kaalasya yugam iti abhidheeyate ||*** 5 *samvatsaraas * is called as *yuga*, and is one kind of calculation. Page **141** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 





**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 72:   
Samvatsarah tu prathamo dviteeyah parivatsarah |   
Idvatsarah truteeyah tu chaturthah cha anuvatsarah |   
Vatsarah panchamah cha atra kaalah ayam yugasamjnitah || *** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Samvatsaraadayah iti | Chaturmaasaih chaandra saavana soura naakshatra   
maanajaih \* darsha adarshaah chaandra trimshat divasah tu saavano naamah |   
Soura arka raashi bhaagaat nakshatrah cha indumandalaat gaditah | iti ukteh |   
Vikalpitaah vibhaktaah; visheshitaah santo yugam syuh iti sarva kaalasya   
pratiparyaayam ayam nishchayah | Ayam arthah - maagha shukla pratipat   
sooryodaya kaale yugapat prakaantaanaam chaturvidhaanaam api maasaanaam   
pancha abda ante yasmaat yugapat samaapti roopo yogah tat samaapti kaalo   
yugam | Lakshanayaa tu tat abda panchakam yugam | Yathaa aadyantayoh eva   
sarva grahayoh api sarvam kruta aadikam yugam, ettavatsu ahoraatreshu   
gateshu etat nakshatra raashisthe arke, etasyaam tithou etat nakshatrasthe vaa   
chandre ayam samvatsara aarabhyate iti pancha abdaanaam chaturmaasa   
apeksha vibhaagatvaat yuktam chaturmaasa vikalpitatvam | Souraabda   
panchakamaye hi yuge souraa maasaah shashtih, saavanaa eka shashtih,   
chaandraa dvi shashtih, nakshatraah sapta shashtih, sourena trimshat rutavah,   
dasha ayanaani, bhaanu bhogya nakshatraani pancha trimshat shatam ityaadi   
jnyeyam | Yathaa aaha vaayuh, \* Shataani ashtaadasha trimshat udayaat   
bhaaskarasya tu | Rutavah trimshatah souraah ayanaani dasha eva tu | Pancha   
trimshat shatam bhaani shashtih maasah tu bhaaskaraat | Souram soumam cha   
vinjyeyam naakshatram saavanam tathaa | Maanaani etaani chatvaari yaih   
puraanam bhavishyati | Puraanam punaryugaantaraavruttih yathaa poorvam iti   
arthah | Vruddha gargah cha \* Yadaa maaghasya shuklasya prati pancha   
uttaraayane | Sahodayam sravishtaabhih somaarko pratipadyatah | Prathamah   
so agnidaivatyo naamnaa samvatsarah smrutah | Yadaa maaghasya shuklasya   
trayodashyaam udagravih | Yukte chandramasaa roudre vaasavam pratipadyate   
| Dviteeyah soumadaivatyah prochyate parivatsarah | Krushne maaghasya   
dashamee vaasavaadou divaakare | Tadaa truteeyam sampraahuh   
idaavatsarkam budhaah | Saptamee maagha shuklasya vaasaraadou divaakare |   
Chaturtham indradaivatyam tam aahuh anuvatsaram | Yadi uttaraayanam   
krushne chaturthyaam tapaso bhavet | Idvatsarah sa vijnyeyah panchamo   
mrutyu daivatah | Niyatam panchamasya ante tathaa eva syaat sahodayah |   
Saavanam cha api souram cha chaandram naakshatram eva cha | Chatvaari   
etaanaani maasaani \(maanaani\) yaih yugam pravibhajyate | Lagadaachaaryah   
cha - \* Maagha shukla pravruttasya taishakrushna sameepinah | Yugasya pancha   
varshasya kaalajnyaanam prachakshate |*** *Chaandra, Saavana, Soura, Naakshatra* are the measures of duration. From *Amaavaasya * to *Amaavaasya * is said to be *Chaandra. Saavana maasa * is said to be 30 days. Based on the *raashi * which Surya enters, is said to be *Soura*. Based on the *Chandramandala, Naakshatra * is told. These are the four kinds of counting. It keeps on coming every five years, is said to be one *yuga*. This is the meaning. In Page **142** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **the *Maagha maasa, Shukla paksha*, at the sunrise time, all the four types of *maasaas * are starting together. At the end of the 5 years, they end at the same time. Because of this, it is said to be a *yuga*. Figuratively, 5 years is said to be a *yuga*. At the beginning and end, all the *grahaas * are joining together - *Kruta, Treta*, etc., so many *ahoraatraas*, when the Sun is in this particular *tithi*, or moon is in this particular *nakshatra*, this *samvatsara * starts. In the same way, these 5 years, which are said to be four kinds of *maasaas*, which are all starting and ending together - this is also said to be a *yuga*. These five years which are said to be a *yuga*, the *soura **maasaas * are 60, *saavana maasaas * are 61, *chaandra maasaas * are 62, *naakshatra **maasaas * are 67. In *Soura * calculation, there are 30 *rutus*, 10 *ayanaas*. According to *Vaayu Puraana*, there are 1830 days, 30 *rutus*, 10 *ayanaas*. These are the four ways of measuring time, where *Soura, Saavana, Chaandra, Naakshatra*; these are said to be forming *Puraana*, and one more *yuga * will start, just like the previous. *Garga * is also quoted - At *Maagha maasa, Shukla paksha, pratipat*, the Sun and Moon rise together; first one is said to be *Samvatsara*, having *Agni * as the *devataa*. When Sun is in *Maagha **maasa, Shukla paksha, trayodashi*, this is said to be *Vaasara. Samvatsara, Parivatsara, **Idvatsara, Anuvatsara * and *Vatsara * are the names of the five years. In *Vedaas*, third one is said to be *Idaa vatsara*, here it is said as *Idvatsara*. Fourth one is *Anuvatsara*, having *Indra * as the *devataa*. Fifth one is said to be *Idvatsara * in the *Vedaas*, having *Mrutyu * as the *devataa*, here it is said to be *Vatsara*. At the beginning of five years, all the four *Soura, Saavana, Chaandra, Naakshatra *- all coincide, and again start. The five years are denoted by the names *Samvatsara, Parivatsara, Idvatsara, **Anuvatsara * and *Vatsara*. At the end of the five years, they again start. These are the four types of *maasaas * by which *yuga * is divided. *Lagadaachaarya *\(who has written the *Vedaanga Jyoutisha*\) has said the same thing. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 73:   
Yah shvetashoyottare shailah shrungavaan iti vishrutah |   
Treeni tasya tu shrungaani yaih ayam shrungavaan smrutah ||*** At the north of *Shveta dveepa*, there is a *parvata * called *Shrungavaan*. Because it has three *shrungaas*, three peaks. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha kaalaantara vishayam veetheetrayam arkasya aaha - yah shvetasya iti |*** There is one more way, by the three *veethis*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 74:   
Dakshinam chottaram chaiva madhyamam vaishuvam tathaa |   
Sharat vasantayoh madhye tat bhaanuh pratipadyate |   
Meshaadou cha tulaadou cha maitreya vishuvam smrutam ||*** There is one in the north, one in the south, one in the centre - *Sharat rutu, Vasanta **rutu*, and in the middle is *Vishuva*. When the Sun is in *Mesha * or in *Tulaa*, it is the mid part of either *Uttaraayana * or *Dakshinaayana*, this is called *Vishuva*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dakshinam iti | Tat madhyashrungam | ***Page **143** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 75:   
Tadaa tulyam ahoraatram karoti timiraapahah |   
Dasha pancha muhoortam vai tat etat ubhayam smrutam ||*** During the Vishuva, the muhoortaas are equal, day and night are equal. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tadaa iti | Ubhayam trimshat naadikam vishuve aho raatrih cha | Yat tu   
maanasottare dakshina veethi ksheeroda madhye vishuvam shaaka dveepa   
uttaraante cha udak kaashtaa iti, vaayu prokte pramanchitam iti atra   
soochitam, tatta tapah tapasou ityaadinaa maagha shravanayoh ayanadvayam   
vakshyamaanam prathame kruttikaa bhaaga iti vaishaakha kaartikayoh   
vishuvadvayam cha pancha samvatsara kalpanaa anugunam yat kaale   
pratyaksha samvaadi tat kaala vishayam jnyeyam | \* Paryaagacchat patango   
asou maaghe jyeshthottame ahani | Madhyena pushkarasyatha bhramate   
dakshinaayane | Dakshinaat vinivrutto asou vishuvastho yadaa ravih |   
Ksheerodasya samudrasya uttaraam tu disham charet | Shraavane cha uttaraam   
kaashthaam chitrabhaanuh yadaa vrajet | Shaaka dveepasya shashtasya   
uttaraam taam dishaam charet | iti vaayu ukti lingaat | Yat tu jyotissiddhaanta   
siddham ujjainyaam udakkashthaa lankaayaam vishuvat veethih tat dakshine   
taavat dakshina kaashthaa iti veethi trayam | Tat tu mesha tulaa vishuvaya   
nakra karkatakaayana dvaya samvaadipraak kaala vishayam | Yathaa shat   
trimshat shate kaligataabde tathaa aaseeta | Samprati tu chatushchatvaaimshat   
shate abde nakra karka tulaa mesha pradeshaat praak eva dvaadashe dine   
ayana vishuve pratyakshe drushyate |*** Day and night are both 30 *naadis*. It is told in the *Vaayu Puraana*, that north of the *Maanasa parvata*, in southern part, *Ksheeroda samudra * is there in the middle; between *Dakshina veethi * and *Ksheeroda*, the northern edge of *Shaaka dveepa*; whenever we see actually, whatever time, that is according to the five *samvatsaraas*, this will be explained in further *shlokaas*. In the *Maagha maasa, Jyeshtha*, when the Sun moves, in the middle of *Pushkara*, he moves in the *Dakshinaayana*. When he returns from *Dakshinaayana*, in the middle, *Vishuva*, he will start moving towards the north. In *Shraavana maasa*, he reaches the north edge. There is a notation of three *veethis, veethi-traya, Ujjayini, Lankaa, Dakshina*. What is told here - *Mesha, **Tulaa, Vishuva, Makara \(Nakra\)* \(in *Uttaraayana*\), *Karkata *\(in *Dakshinaayana*\), what is told here, is told in the older times. In 3600 *Kaliyuga*, it was like that. Now, presently, in 4400 *Kali Yuga, Vishuva * is seen in the 12th day, even before the *Makara **maasa*, and *Karka*, even before the Sun reaches them, *Vishuva * is observed. 



***Atah tat ganita anurodhaat itah poorvam api ayanaadi parivruttih kadaachit   
bhavet iti anumeeyate, yena tri shrunga veethi samvaadah syaat | Tasmaat   
maargasheershe yadaa ayana varsha aarambhah tat kaala varsha vishaya   
trishrunga veethee traya sancharo arkasya iti kalpyam | Maargasheershasya hi   
varshaaditvam kechit brooyuh | \* Aadaaya maarasheershaadi dvou dvou maasou   
rutuh matah, iti aaha kaatyaayanah | Amarasimhascha \* Maargaadeenaam   
yugaih kramaat, dvou dvou maargaadi maasou syaat rutuh, iti cha hemanta aadi ***Page **144** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****sharat antam rutoon maargaadi kaartikaantam maasaan cha anukramya   
abhyadatta | Agrahaayanamasyeti hi aagrahaayanee mrugashirah, tat   
yogaadyaa poornimaa saa aagrahaayanee, sa agrahaayaniko maasah iti   
samaakhyaa niruktitah cha iti tridhaa treeveethivyavasthaa | Idaaneem tu   
varshasya maargaaditvam vrataadyartham | \* Dvou dvou maagha aadi maasou   
syaat rutuh iti cha paathaantaram | Ato maaghaaditvam panchaabda yuga tat   
phala aadi jnyaana artham | \* Mukham vaa etat samvatsarasya yat phalgunee   
poornamaasah \* iti shrutam tu phalgunyaaditvam yaagaadyartham | Tathaa \*   
Mukham vaa etat samvatsarasya yat chitraa poorna maasah, \* Madhuscha   
maaghavah cha ityaadi shruti upalakshitatvam varshasya chaitra shukla   
pratipada aadi bahu shruti smruti jyotisshaastra puraana lokaachaaraadi   
siddham sarva vyavahaaraartham iti shaastra nyaaya ganita pratyakshaadi   
nischito vivekah | Yat uktam lainga vaayavyayoh \* Aagamaat anumaanaat cha   
pratyakshaat upapaaditah | Pareekshya nipunam buddhyaa shraddhaatavyam   
vipaschitaa || Chakshushaa lakshitam lekhyam ganitam buddhi sattamaah |   
Panchaiva hetavo vipraa jyotirganavichintane ||*** Like this, changes were there during the *ayanaas*. There was also a time when *Maargasheersha * was at the beginning of the year, that was the time when *Triveethi * was there. Some people say that *Maargasheersha * is at the beginning of the year. *Kaatyaayana * has said that *Maargasheersha * is the beginning, and from there, two two months are one *rutu * each. *Amarasimha * also says a similar thing. *Mrugashira * is also called *Agrahaayani*, beginning of the year, *agram ayanam **asya*; even the *Poornima * there is said to be *Agrahaayani*. Now, we say that the beginning of year is *Maargasheersha*, is because of performing certain *vrataas*. In *Vedaas*, there is also a mention that *Phalguni * is the beginning of the year, this is because *yaaga * is performed at that time. *Madhu, Maaghava*, what the *Shrutis * tell, the year starts with *Chaitra Shukla pratipat*; this is established in *Shrutis, Smrutis, **ganita, vyavahaara, loka*, etc. One has to see *Shrutis, Smrutis, Ganita*, and all of that, and then establish the days. 



During *Tiruppavai*, we do *anusandhaana * that *Maargasheersha * is the *Usha: kaala*, that's why it is very sacred. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 76:   
Prathame kruttikaa bhaage yathaa bhaasvaan tadaa shashee |   
Vishaakhaanaam chaturthe amshe mune tishthati asamshayam ||*** When the Sun is in *Kruttikaa nakshatra's * first part, or *Mesha raashi's * last part, Moon will be in *Vishaakhaa's * fourth part, or *Vrushchika's * beginning. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Prathama iti | \* Mukham vaa etat nakshatraanaam yat kruttikaah \* Kruttikaah   
prathamam vishaakhe uttamam ityaadim praak kaala vishaya shruti moolaa   
vishuva dvaya uktih | Kruttikaa adye amshe meshaa ante, vishaakhanaanaam   
chaturthe amshe vrushikaa aadye amshe | ***In the earlier times, the two *vishuvaas * were counted based in this. Sun will be in *Kruttikaa's * first *amsha*, at the end of *Mesha*; Moon will be in fourth part Page **145** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **of *Vishaakhaa*, and first part of *Vruschikaa*. These are the two *visuhvaas * told, according to earlier times. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 77:   
Vishaakhaanaam yadaa sooryah charati amsham truteeyakam |   
Tadaa chandram vijaaneeyaat kruttikaa shirasi sthitam ||*** Or, when Sun is *Vishaakhaa's * third part, or *Tulaa's * last part, or Moon is in *Krittikaa's * first part or *Meshaa's * last part, that is said to be *Vishuva*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vishaakhaanaam iti | Kruttikaa shirasi meshaa ante, vishaakha truteeya   
amsham tulaa antam | ***Or when Sun is in *Vishaakhaa's * third part, or *Tulaa's * last part; and Moon will be in *Kruttikaa's * first and *Meshaa's * last part. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 78:   
Tat eva vishuvaakhyo ayam kaalah punyo abhidheeyate |   
Tadaa daanaadi deyaani devebhyah prayataatmabhih ||*** This is said to be *Vishuva kaala*. This is a very sacred time, *punya kaala*. This is said to be a very auspicious time; people have to give *daana * and other things at that time; it will bring all good. 



We are studying *Amsha * 2, Chapter 8, where the divisions of time were told by *Sri **Paraasharar * to *Maitreyar*. He was telling about the two *ayanaas - **Uttaraayana * and *Dakshinaayana*, and the middle part which is called *Vishuva*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tat eva iti | Ayam chandraarkayoh ubhayoh api vishuvaavasthitiroopo mahaa   
vishuvaakhyah punyo daana kaalah praacheena vishuva samvaadee na   
idaaneemtana samvaadee | Atah kaalaantare api tat tat kaaleena chandra arka   
ubhaya vishuva vishesha samsthaanasya upalakshanam idam | Yathaa itah   
praak meenaanta kanyaantayoh chandra arka sthitih daana kaala ityarthah |   
Imam vijaaneeyaat - Asamshayam ganitena imam kaalam buddhvaa tatra   
daanam dadyaat |*** This was told during earlier times, and not during current times, is what *Sri Engal **Aalwaan * is telling. It is a very auspicious time when one has to do *daana*. It was earlier known as *Mahaa Vishuva*, when Sun and Moon are in their *Vishuva * positions. Even at later times, or any other time, where the Sun and Moon are positioned like this, this is *Vishuva*, a very auspicious time, and very special time. Earlier, it was end of *Meena * and *Kanyaa*, when Sun and Moon were positioned, it was said to be a very auspicious time for charity. This is the conclusion - When Sun and Moon are in *Vishuva*, that has to be known from *Vedic * Astrology, Mathematics, and do charity, as it is very auspicious. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 79:   
Braahmanebhyah pitrubhyah cha mukham etat tu daanajam | ***Page **146** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Datta daanah tu vishuve krutakrutyo abhijaayate ||*** At the *Vishuva*, mid position of the two *ayanaas, Uttaraayana * and *Dakshinaayana*, this is said to be a very very auspicious time because it is when one gives charity to *Braahmanaas, Pitrus*; it is the right time when they will also accept *daanaas * at this time. Whoever gives, all good will happen to such a person. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Braahmanebhyah iti | Etat hi daanaartham jaatam vivrutam mukham   
devaanaam | Atra kaale dattam devaanaam mukhe dattam iva saakshaat   
preenanam ityarthah \* Mukham etat tu daivatam iti vaayu ukteh | Vishuve tat   
kaaleena madhya veethee praveshe |*** It is as though we are directly giving to *devataas*; just to accept the charity, *devataas * are waiting at that time; they will do all good to such a person. It is told like this in *Vaayu Puraana. Vishuva* is the mid position. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 80:   
Ahoraatraa ardhamaasou tu kalaah kaashthaah kshanaah tathaa |   
Pournamaasee tathaa jnyeyaa amaavaasyaa tathaa eva cha |   
Sineevaalee kuhoo cha eva raakaa cha anumatih tathaa ||*** Day and night, *paksha *\(fortnight\), *kalaa, kaashtha, kshana*, time of *Pournami*, time of *Amaavaasyaa*, times close to the *Pournami * and *Amaavaasyaa*, these are to be known. *Sineevaalee * and *Kuhoo * are two kinds of *Amaavaasyaa. **Raakaa * and *Anumati * are two types of *Pournami*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Daana prasangaat yaagaadi punya kaala ahoraatraadi jnyeyam iti aaha -   
ahoraatra iti |*** While telling about the auspiciousness of the time, for charity, *Paraasharar * also says that one has to know the right time for performing *yaagaas*, etc., the *punya kaala*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 81:   
Tapah tapasyou madhu maadhavou cha shukrah shuchih cha ayanam uttaram   
syaat |   
Nabho nabhasyou cha ishah tathaa oorjah sahah sahasyou iti dakshinam tat || ***These are the names appearing in the *Shruti, Vedaas*, and is counted with *Maagha **maasa * as the first month. *Tapas, Tapasya, Madhu, Maadhava, Shukra * and *Shuchi * are said to be *Uttaraayana. Nabha, Nabhasya, Isha, Oorja, Saha, **Sahasya * are *Dakshinaayana*. 



*Tapa * and *Tapasya * are *Maagha * and *Phaalguna*. *Madhu * and *Maadhava * are *Chaitra * and *V**aishaakha. Shukra * and *Shuchi * are *Jyeshtha * and *Aashaadha*. These six months are *Uttaraayana*. *Nabha * and *Nabhasya * are *Shraavana * and *Bhaadrapaada*. *Isha * and *Oor* *ja * are *Aashvina * and *Kaartika. Saha * and *Sahasya * are *Maargashira **\(Agrahaayana\)* and *Pausha*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ***Page **147** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Tapa iti | \* Tapa iti uktaa poorvam maaghaadyaa hi ayana klrupti; praacheenaa   
| Aashlesha ardhaat dakshinam uttaram ayanam raverdhanishtaadyam | Aaseet   
kadaa api noonam yenoktam cha eva poorva shaastreshu | Saampratam ayanam   
savituh karkatakaadyam mrugaaditah cha aadyam || Iti varaahamira ukti   
lingaat |*** In olden times, it was done starting from *Maagha*. Starting from *Dhanishtha * is *Uttaraayana*, and starting from *Aashlesha * is *Dakshinaayana*. Perhaps it was like that in some *shaastraas*. Now, it is *Mrugashira * and *Karkataka. **Varaahamihira * has told like this. 





Having told about the knowledge of *Ayanaas, Vishuva*, divisions of time, that one has to know this for giving charity, good deeds, *yaagaas*, now, incidentally, *Paraasharar * is telling about the four *Lokapaalaas * here. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 82:   
Lokaalokah cha yah shailah praak ukto bhavato mayaa |   
Lokapaalaah tu chatvaarah tatra tishthanti suvrataah ||*** I had told earlier about *Lokaaloka parvata*. There, four *Lokapaalaas * are present. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Lokaaloka iti | Pitruyaana dakshinou adhi bhoota agastya bhramana vrutta   
lakshakasya lokaalokasya upari prasangaat lokapaala sthaana uktih | Maatsye   
hi \* Lokapaalaah sthitaah hi ete lokaaloke chaturdisham || Uttaram yat   
agastyasya shrugam devarshi poojitam |*** The positions of *Lokapaalaas * are told here incidentally in order to tell about *Pitruyaana*, till the end of the southern part, which *Agastya * moved around; *Lokaaloka * marks the place up to which *Agastya * went in the south; up to that is counted as *Pitruyaana. Lokapaalaas * are present in all the four directions. To the north of *Agastya's * place, which was worshipped by *Devarshis*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 83:   
Sudhaamaa shankapaat cha eva kardamasya aatmajou dvija |   
Hiranyaromaa cha eva anyah chaturthah ketumaan api ||*** *Kardama's * sons *Sudhaama * and *Shankapaat*, and *Hiranyaroma * and *Ketumaan * are the *Lokapaalaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 84:   
Nirdvandvaa nirabheemaanaa nistandraa nishparigrahaah |   
Lokapaalaah sthitaah hi ete lokaaloke chaturdisham ||*** All the four directions, these *Lokapaalaas * are protecting and looking after these areas. They don't have desire-hatred and such dualities. They don't have *abhimaana*, egoism. They are never lazy; they don't sleep at all, are always awake. They are performing their duty in a selfless way. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 85:   
Uttaram yat agastyasya ajaveethyaah cha dakshinam |   
Pitruyaanah sa vai panthaah vaishvaanara pathaat bahih || ***Page **148** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **Nine *veethis * are told. To the north of *Agastya's * place, and to the south of *Ajaveethi*, this is said to be the *Pitruyaana * path. This does not include the *Vaishvaanara veethi*. Outside of *Vaishvaanara*, and to the north of *Agastya*, to the south of *Ajaveethi*, is said to be *Pitruyaana*. 



27 *nakshatraas * are divided into nine, having three each, known as *veethis*. To the north is *Naagaveethi, Gajaveethi * and *Airaavathee*. In the middle are *Vaarshabhiveethi, Goveethi * and *Jaradgavaveethi*. To the south are *Ajaveethi, **Mrugaveethi * and *Vaishvaanaraveethi*. Out of these, *Mrugaveethi * is said to be *Pitruyaana*, where *Pitrus * live. Though *Vaishvaanaraveethi * is south of *Agastya*, it is included in *Devayaana*, and is going to be told. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Uttaram iti | Ajaveethee ashvini aadi tri trinakshatra lakshita nava veetheeshu   
yaamya veethee traye prathamaa moola aadi tri nakshatra aashritaa \*   
naagaraaja airaavata vrushabha go jaradgava aja mruga paavakaakhyaah |   
Ashvini aadyaih kaischit tribhakram aadveethayah kathitaah || iti   
jyotisshaastrokteh | \* Moolaa aadhaadha uttara aashaadhaa ajaveeti   
abhishabditaa | Shravanam cha shravisthaa cha maargee shatabhishak tathaa |   
Vaishvaanaree bhaadrapadaa revatee cha iti keertitaa || iti vaayu maatsya   
ukteh cha | Etena agastya aja veethyoh madhyadeshah sarvo api pitru yaanam   
eva | Kintu tatrasthaa api tat dakshinaa vaishvaanara veethee pitruyaanatayaa   
na graahyaa |*** Starting from *Ashvini*, three *nakshatraas * each, mark one *veethi*. First is *Naagaveethi*, which includes *Ashvini, Bharani, Kruttikaa. Gajaveethi - Rohini, **Mrugashira * and *Aardraa. Airaavathee - Punarvasu, Pushya, Aashleshaa. Vaarshabhi - **Maagha, Poorva Phalguni, Uttara Phalguni. Goveethi - Hasta, Chittaa, Swaathi. **Jaradgavi - Vishaakhaa, Anuraadhaa, Jyeshthaa. Ajaveethi - Moolaa, Poorvaashaada, **Uttaraashaadha. Mrugaveethi - Shravana, Shatabhishaa, Dhanishthaa. Vaishvaanari - **Poorvaabhaadra, Uttaraabhaadra, Revathi*. There are nine *veethis*. In *Yama's * direction, *Yaamya*, southern direction, there are three *veethis - Ajaveethi, **Mrugaveethi, Vaishvaanaraveethi*. The first one among these is *Ajaveethi*. These are told in *Vaayu Puraana * and *Matsya Puraana. Agastya's * place and *Ajaveethi *- the middle path, is said to be *Pitruyaana*. Though *Vaishvaanara veethi * is located in the southern part, it is not counted in the *Pitruyaana*. This is told in *Jyotisshaastra*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 86:   
Tatraasate mahaatmaana rushayo ye agnihotrinah |   
Bhootaarambhakrutam brahma shamsanto rutvik udyataah |   
Praarabhante loka kaamaah teshaam panthaah sa dakshinah ||*** There, great sages are living, engaged in *Agnihotra * and other *karmaas*. They praise the *Vedaas*. The *rishis * live in the southern part. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 87:   
Chalitam te punarbrahma sthaapayanti yuge yuge |   
Santatyaa tapasaa cha eva maryaadaabhih shrutena cha ||*** Page **149** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***Rishis * reestablish the *vaidika dharmaas*, which is said to be *Brahma * here. That which has got disturbed or broken over various *yugaas*, the *rishis * reestablish it. They reestablish it through progeny, tapas, and through establishing the *varna aashrama **dharmaas*, and through various shaastraas. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tatra iti | Tatra pitru yaane bhoota aarambhah krutam kruteeh kaaryam yasya   
tat brahma karmakaandam stuvantah rutvik dvaaraa yajnya udyuktaah karma   
praarabhante |*** The first portion of the *Vedaas*, said to be *Karmakaanda*, where all the *yaagaas * and *karmaas * are told, which are *Bhagavat aaraadhana roopa * in the ultimate sense; for other *purushaarthaas*, benefits, various *yaagaas, yajnyaas * are told there. Doing these *karmaas*, and offering *aahutis * to *devataas, srushti * goes on, all beings are sustained, because of the *yajnyaas. Rishis*, who are praising this part of the *Vedas*, are engaged in various *karmaas * in order to perform those *yajnyaas*, ordained in that part of the *Vedaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 88:   
Jaayamaanah tu poorve te paschimaanaam gruheshu vai |   
Paschimaah cha eva poorveshaam jaayante nidhaneshviha ||*** The fathers are reborn in their children's families, and children are again reborn in their forefather's *kula*. The progeny continues like this. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Jaayamaanah iti | Poorve pitarah pashchimaanaam sva putraanaam,   
paschimaah putraah cha, poorveshaam sva putree bhooyasthitaanaam,   
nidhaneshu kuleshu, adhikaari karmavashaat shruti aadi sampradaayaaya   
bhooyo jaayante | Nilayeshu iti cha paathah | Yathaa aaha vaayuh \* Praapte   
tretaayuge cha eva punah saptarshayah tu iha | Pravartayanti taan varnaan   
aashramaan cha pruthak pruthak | Teshaam eva anvaye dheeraa utpadyante   
punah punah || Jaayamaanah pitaa putre putrah pitari cha eva ha | Evam   
avartamaanaah te dvaapareshu punah punah | Kalpaanaam bhaashya   
vidyaanaam jnyaana shaastra krutah cha ye |*** These *rishis * are having *adhikaara*, according to their various *punyaas, sukrutaas*, are made to reestablish the *Vedic * dharma by *Paramaatman*. Because of this, they are the *adhikaaris*. Because of the good deeds done, they get to establish the *Vaidika **dharmaas*. Again to establish the *Shruti sampradaaya*, they are again born. *Saptarshis*, when the *Treta yuga * comes, they again bring in to establish properly all the *varna aashrama dharmaas*. They are born again and again in their *kulaas*. Again being born in this *Dvaapara yuga*, they reestablish the *Shrutis, **shaastraas*, etc. again and again. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 89:   
Evam aavartamaanaah te tishthanti niyata vrataah |   
Savituh dakshinam maargam shritaa hi aachandra taarakam ||*** Again and again, coming back, to establish, being reborn like this, following Page **150** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **the *Vaidhika dharmaas * very strictly. They resort to the southern part of Sun, as long as the Sun and Moon live. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Evam iti | Dakshino maargo dhoomaadih cchaandogya ukto yathaa \* Atha ya ime   
graame ishtaapoorte dattam iti upaasate te dhoomam abhisambhavanti   
dhoomaat raatrim raatreh apara paksham aparakshaat yaan shat dakshineti   
maasaanstaaneti samvatsaram abhipraapnuvanti maasebhyah pitru lokam pitru   
lokaat aakaasham aakaashaat chandramasam esha vai somo raajaa sa   
devaanaam annam tam devaa bhakshayanti tasmin yaavat sampaatam ushitvaa   
atha etam eva adhvaanam punaraavartante \* iti | Atra cha uktah shlokah \*   
Dhoomam raatrim bahulam ayane dakshine arkasya maasaan aapadyante pitru   
padam atha vyoma chandram divam cha | Pratyaavruttyaa gagana pavanou   
dhooma abhram cha megham vrushti udbhijjaan purusha vanite dakshino maarga   
eshah ||*** The *dakshina maarga * is said to be *Dhoomaadi*. There are two - *Devayaana **\(Archiraadi\)* and *Pitruyaana \(Dhoomaadi\)*. It is told in *Chaandogya Upanishad * that those who do meditation on the *Paramaatman, Parabrahma upaasanaa*, when they meditate upon the *Tapah shabda vaachya Paramaatman * with *shraddhaa*, they attain the *Archiraadi maarga * and go to *moksha*. Those who live in the villages, as householders, who perform *Ishtaa *\(various *yajnya yaagaas*, sacrifices\), *Poortaa *\(humanitarian deeds like building water tanks\), *Datta *\(giving *daana*, charity\), they go to the deity of Smoke, *dhoomam*, the *Dhoomaabhimaani devataa*. From there, they go to the deity of night. From there, to the deity of *Krishna paksha*. From there to the *abhimaani **devataa * of *Dakshinaayana*. From there, they go to deity of *Samvatsara*. From there, they go to the world of manes, *Pitruloka*. From *Pitruloka*, they go to the deity of *Aakaasha*, then to the Moon. This is the food of the gods, the gods eat him, the gods get the service done by these people, so they use them like animals, as told in the *Upanishads*. After having spent all the *punyaas * accumulated, in performing *Ishtaa, Poortaa, Datta*, till the *punya * is spent, they live there, they serve the gods, live in their worlds and enjoy. When the *punya * is completed, exhausted, they return by the same route, up to *Aakaasha*. From *Aakaasha*, they go to *Vaayu*, then to *Dhooma*. This is the *Panchaagni Vidyaa * told in *Chaandogya Upanishad. **Dhooma, raatri, bahula, Dakshinaayana, Aakaasha*, Moon, *Diva*, and after that, when they come back, they go through *Aakaasha * first, then *Vaayu, Dhooma, Abhra *\(the previous state of cloud\), then the cloud itself, then rains, then *udbijya, vreehi*, grains, when a person eats that grain, and unites with a woman, it gets transferred to woman, and they are born again. This is told in *Panchaagni vidyaa*. Those who go by the *Pitruyaana*, they take this path. Those who take *Devayaana*, they go to *Moksha*. 



Here, another *Devayaana * is told. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 90:   
Naaga veethi uttaram yat cha saptarshibhyah cha dakshinam |   
Uttarah savituh panthaa devayaanah cha sa smrutah ||*** Page **151** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **The northern part of *Naagaveethi*, and the southern side of *Saptarshis*, this is said to be the *Uttara * part, the *Devayaana*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 91:   
Tatra te vashinah siddhaah vimalaa brahmachaarinah |   
Santatim te jugupsanti tasmaat mrutyuh jitah cha taih ||*** Those who live there are *Brahmachaaris*, always established in the meditation of *Brahman*, chanting the *Vedaas * all the time, pure minded, they have controlled their senses, they are *siddhaas*, they are not interested in procreation, they have won over death. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 92:   
Ashta asheeti sahasraani muneenaam oordhvaretasaam |   
Udak panthaanam aryamnah sthitaani aabhoota sampluvam ||*** *Oordhvaretaas * are *rishis * who have controlled their desires, *kaama*. There are 88,000 of them. They are present in the north part of the Sun. They are present till the *Naimittika pralaya*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 93:   
Te asamprayogaat lobhasya maithunasya cha varjanaat |   
Icchaadvesha apravruttyaa cha bhoota aarambha vivarjanaat || ***Because they have given up *stree sanga, lobha*, they don't have *icchaa, dvesha*, and the dualities, they are not interested in procreation. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ta iti | Bhootaarambha vivarjanaat nivartaka shruti aashrayanaat |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 94:   
Punah cha kaamaan samyogaat shabdaadeh dosha darshanaat |   
Iti ebhih kaaranaih shuddhaah te amrutatvam hi bhejire ||*** They have seen defects in all the objects of senses like *shabda, sparsha, roopa, rasa, **gandha*. They re never interested in *kaama, stree sanga*, procreation. Because of all these reasons, being very pure, they have attained *amrutatva*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 95:   
Aabhoota samplavam sthaanam amrutatvam vibhaavyate |   
Trailokya sthiti kaalo ayam apunarmaara uchyate ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aabhoota samplavam brahma dinaantam yaavat sthiteh amrutatva aakhyaanam   
| Tat udak maargasthaanaam muktih iti aaha aabhoota samplavam sthaanam   
amrutatvam iti | Trailokya sthiti kaala eva iti amruta apunarmaara paryaayah   
| ****Naimittika pralaya * is the end of the day of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, one *kalpa. **Praakruta pralaya * is with 100 years of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, when *laya * of *Chaturmukha Brahma * also happens, when entire *prakruti *Page **152** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***mandala * merges. These *rishis * live upto the *Naimittika pralaya*. Because they are present till the day of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, one *kalpa*, this is said to be *amrutatva*. This is the duration for which the three worlds - *Bhooh, Bhuvah, Suvah * exist; at the end of this, these three worlds merge, get destroyed; this is said to be *Aabhoota **Sambhava*. This is said to be the *mukti * of those in the northern part of Sun, this is told because they live as long as the three worlds are present. At the *pralaya * which happens to the three worlds at the end of a day of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, they also get merged. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 96:   
Brahma hatyaa ashvamedhabhyaam paapa punya kruto vidhih |   
Aabhoota samplavaantam tu phalam uktam tayoh dvija || ***Those who do *Brahma hatyaa*, a *mahaa paapa*; and those who perform *Ashvamedha **Yaaga*, which is a *punya*; the fruits, *paapa * and *punya * respectively, are said to be present till the end of this *kalpa*. 



For one who does *brahma hatyaa*, his *paapa * will not get destroyed for such a long time. Those who do *Ashvamedha yaaga*, their *punya * makes them live for a long time. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Brahma hatyaa ashvamedhabhyaam iti | Brahma hatyaa ashvamedhabhyaam   
kriyaabhyaam paapa punya apoorve bhaavayatah pumso ayam phala bhogo   
vidhih | Evam aakalpam brahmahaa narakam ashvamedhee svargam bhunkta iti   
arthah |*** *Apoorva * is what comes out of a *yajnya*, a fruit. Those who do these *brahma **hatyaa * or *Ashvamedha yaaga*, their fruits are said to be this. One who does *Brahma **hatyaa*, he will suffer in *naraka * till the end of the *kalpa*. One who performs *Ashvamedha yaaga*, he enjoys *svarga * till end of the *kalpa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 97:   
Yaanvanmaatre pradeshe tu maitreya avasthito dhruvah |   
Kshayamaayaati taavat tu bhoomeh aabhoota samplavaat || ***All the worlds which are present till the *Dhruva's * place, only those places are destroyed - these three worlds. *Aabhoota sambhava * is *naimittika pralaya*; the three worlds will get destroyed during *naimittika pralaya*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 98:   
Oordhva uttaram rushibhyah tu dhruvo yatra vyavasthitah |   
Etat vishnupadam divyam truteeyam vyomni bhaasuram ||*** Beyond these three worlds, and where *Dhruva * is also present, this is said to be *Vishnu **pada*, which is very bright, shining, full of light. This is said to be the third place. Above that, where *Dhruva * is there, *rishis * live there. This is *Vishnu Pada*, the third world with respect to *Pruthivi*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ***Page **153** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Atha vishnupadam vishnupadeem cha cha prasanchayati oordhva uttaram iti |   
Rushibhyah uttarasyaam dishi oordhvam cha dhruva aadhaaro vishnu   
padaakhyam sthaanam bhoomi upekshayaa truteeyam | Tat cha vairaajasya   
hrudaya naadee sthaaneeyatvaat vishnoh nivaasah | Atah atra vishnu paade   
svarga adhika soukhyaat satya lokaat arvaacheenatvat cha moksha uktih krama   
mukti arthaa | Tatsthaah kramaat brahma lokam etya brahmanaa saha   
muchyante | Vishnupade sthitaah tatra labdha jnyaanaa muchyante; na tu tat   
muktaih labhyam sthaanam iti arthah |*** *Bhooh, Bhuvah, Suvah, Mahah *- this is the fourth one, but with respect to *Bhoomi*, this is the third place. That is why this is told as *Truteeyaa*. To the north of the *rishis*, and also above, *Vishnu pada * which is supported by *Dhruva * is there. If you take the seven worlds - *Sapta lokaas, \(Bhooh, Bhuvah, Suvah, Mahah, Janah, Tapah, Satyam*\), this is said to be the position of the *hrudaya. Vairaaja * is *Chaturmukha Brahma*, the *Viraat purusha. Antaryaami, Parabrahma * is located in the *hrudaya *- this is the place where Vishnu lives. The *moksha * told in this *Vishnu pada * is *Krama mukti*; those who are here enjoy much more pleasures and happiness compared to even *svarga*, even though it is below *Satya loka. Krama mukti * means that they gradually do *upaasanaa*, and then attain *moksha*. Those who live there, in order, go and attain *Brahma loka*, and along with *Chaturmukha Brahma*, they also get liberated. Those who are in *Vishnu pada*, if they perform *upaasanaa * there itself, and attain that *jnyaana*, they also can get liberated. *Vishnu pada * itself is not the place attained by *muktaas*; it is not *saakshaat Parama Pada*. This is one of the steps in attaining *moksha*. 



The word *Parama pada * comes here, which is explained in the commentary. The next *shlokaas * tell about the worlds above the three worlds. 



We are studying *Amsha * 2, Chapter 8, where we studied about the various *lokaas * where *rishis * live, the *Vishnu Pada*, which is also told by the name *Paramapada * in these *shlokaas*. How the people who do *Ashvamedha yaaga*, go and enjoy the *svargaas*, till the *naimittika pralaya* time. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 99:   
Nirdhoota dosha pankaanaam yateenaam samyataatmanaam |   
Sthaanam tat paramam vipra punya paapa parikshaye || ****Rishis * who have got rid of their *punya * and *paapa*, go and stay there. They don't have any blemish. They are all established in *saatvika tapas*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 100:   
Apunya punya uparame ksheena ashesha aapti hetavah |   
Yatra gatvaa na shochanti tat vishnoh paramam padam ||*** When *paapa * and *punya * both get destroyed, and they are not interested in any other benefits, where the *rishis * live, where they don't have any grief at all, this is said to be *Paramapada*. 



Page **154** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **The word *Paramapada * is used for *lokaas * above the three *lokaas - Bhooh, Bhuvah, **Suvah*. This is not *saakshaat Paramapada*, the *Vaikuntha loka*, as told in the Commentary. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 101:   
Dharma dhruvaadyaah tishthanti yatra vai loka saakshinah |   
Tat saarshtya utpanna yogaardhih tat vishnoh paramam padam ||*** The *loka saakshis*, which are looking after the worlds, *Dharma * and *Dhruva * are located there. This is said to be *Vishnu's Paramapada*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dharma dhruvaadyaah iti | Tasya vishnoh; saarshtyam samaana aishvaryataa |   
Indriyaadi vasheekaranaih aishvaryaadi yogardhih; \* Aishvaryaat vihito yogo   
yogaat aishvaryam ishyate | Yogaishvaryamrute mokshah kathanchit na   
upapadyate | iti harivamsha ukteh |*** *Yogardhi * means the abundance of *yoga*. Obtaining *samaana aishvarya*, the abundance of yoga is achieved by controlling all the sense organs. *Harivamsha * is quoted here. This is the *aishwarya*. The *aishwarya * is controlling the senses. When the yoga is fulfilled, perfected, they have complete control on the senses. Without control of senses, they cannot go upwards, cannot achieve *moksha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 102:   
Yatra otam etat protam cha yat bhootam sacharaacharam |   
Bhaavyam cha vishvam maitreya tat vishnoh paramam padam ||*** What was there existing before, and what is going to come later on, created later; the three worlds, everything is controlled above the three worlds, are controlled like warp and weft of a cloth - the horizontal and vertical threads of a cloth. This is said to be *Vishnu's Paramapada* here. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 103:   
Diveeva chakshuraatatam vitatam yat mahaatmanaam |   
Viveka jnyaana drushtam cha tat vishnoh paramam padam ||*** All pervading, the *chakshus * is said to be *Soorya * here. They perceive through their knowledge, the *Mahaatmaas * there. As though the Sun in the *Dyu loka*, like this, their knowledge is spread all over. This is said to be *Vishnu's Paramapada*. 



This *shloka * is similar to the *Shruti mantra - Diveeva chakshuraatatam ... sadaa **pashyanti soorayah*, which is told with respect to the *Nityasooris*, who are there in *saakshaat Sri Vaikuntha * itself. *Yat vishnoh paramam padam sadaa pashyanti **soorayah | Diveeva chakshuraatatam ... * ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Diveeva iti | Chakshuh sooryah; ayam cha \* Tat vishnoh iti mantra dvaya ***Page **155** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****anugrahah |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 104:   
Yasmin pratishtito bhaasvan medheebhootah svayam dhruvah |   
Dhruve cha sarva jyoteemshi jyotishu ambho mucho dvija || ***These are all worlds in the *Prakruti mandala * only. In this, Sun is present; *Dhruva * is present as the central pole supporting everything. In him are established all the stars. All the clouds are supported by that. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 105:   
Megheshu santataa vrushtih vrushteh srushteh cha poshanam |   
Aapyaanam cha sarveshaam devaadeenaam mahaamune ||*** From the clouds, rains happen. Clouds are responsible for the rains, and all the vegetation, because of which living beings are nurtured. It brings joy to *Devaas * and everyone. 



This is why it is said to be the cause. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 106:   
Tatah cha aajyaahutih dvaaraa poshitaah te havirbhujah |   
Vrushteh \(Srushteh\) kaaranataam yaanti bhootaanaam sthitaye punah ||*** The cycle continues. Here, the *yajnya, yaaga, anushthaana * happens. There, they offer *aajyaahuti * through *Agni * to the *Devataas*. This again is the cause of rains. This, again, is the cause of the lives of all the beings. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 107:   
Evam etat padam vishnoh truteeyam amalaatmakam |   
Aadhaara bhootam lokaanaam trayaanaam vrushti kaaranam ||*** This third one is said to be world of *Vishnu*, which is pure, without any defect. This is the support for all the three worlds; the rains happen from there. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 108:   
Tatah prabhavati brahman sarva paapa haraa sarit |   
Gangaa devaanganaagaanaam anulepana pinjaraa ||*** Now, *Paraasharar * tells about River *Gangaa*. From there, the *Gangaa * river flows, which destroys all the sins. It has got a beautiful brownish hue, because of paste present in the bodies of the *Apsaras * and maidens there. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tat vishnoh padam sarvasya hetuh aashrayah cha iti uktam | Paavanam cha iti   
aaha - tatah pravati iti aadinaa | Tata iti | Tatoh vishnupada maargaat |   
Gangaa hi \* Trivikrama pada udbhinna brahmaanda sushirodbhavaa | Tathaa   
cha vaamana puraane \* Tatah prataapavaan brahman bruhat vishnvanghrih ***Page **156** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****ambare | Brahmaanda udaram aahatya niraalokam jagaama sah ||   
Vishnvanghrinaa prasarataa kataahe hemni bhedite | Ambaraat vishnumaayaa   
atha baahyam ambhah kataahatah || Vishnvanghri padma ooru dandaadgaam   
gataa vai nadee tadaa | Baahyatoya mahaadhaaraa dasha paapa vinaashinee ||   
ityaadi | Sri vishnu dharmottare cha \* brahmaandah taaditah tena cchidrataam   
agamat prabho | Brahmaandam baahya toyena dasha paapa hrutaa aavrutam ||   
Tena cchidrena tat toyam viveshaandam maheepate || iti | Puraanaantare tu   
brahmanah kamandalu jalena haricharane kshaalite ganga udbhootaa iti |   
Anyatra tu dharma eva brahma aajnyayaa draveebhoota iti | Atah traivikrame   
paade brahma kamandalu jalena kshaalyamaane tat aparyaaptayaa tat   
poortyartham dharme draveebhoote tatra api apoorne brahmaanda kataaha   
bhede baahya udakaa dhaaraa cchidrena vishnu paada sparshinee gaam gataa   
gangaa aaseet iti avirodhah |*** This place of Vishnu supports everything. It is the cause and support of everything. It is also very sacred and purifies. From the Lotus Feet of *Vishnu*; when *Bhagavaan * did *Vaamana Avataara * and started growing as *Trivikrama*, His *paadaas * became so huge that they broke through *Brahmaanda*; at that time, there was a hole created in *Brahmaanda; Gangaa * comes in from there; this is told in *Vaamana Puraana*. His foot started growing in the sky. His *paada * broke through the *Brahmaanda * and occupied the place beyond that. When the Cosmic Egg was broken, from *Vishnu Paada*, the water started flowing. From the sky, water which was present outside started flowing through *Vishnu Paada*, it entered the skies. The outside water started entering, and it destroys the ten sins - *pancha paatakaas, **upapaatakaas*. This is told in *Vaamana Puraana*. This is also told in *Vishnu **Dharmottara Puraana*. When *Vishnu's Paada * started growing, it broke through the *Brahmaanda*, and there was a huge hole. The whole *Brahmaanda* was occupied by the waters which were outside; they destroy all the ten sins. Through that hole, water entered into the anda, inside the Cosmic Egg. In another *puraana*, it is said that when *Vishnu Paada * started growing, when it entered *Satya Loka, Chaturmukha **Brahma * did *Abhisheka * to that *Paada*, and that became *Gangaa * river later. *Chaturmukha Brahma * did *Abhisheka * to the *Paada * with his *kamandalu jala*. At another place, it is told that *Dharma * itself became a river, and took the form of water, and became *Ganga * river. What is told in another place is that *Trivikrama **Paada * was so huge that the water in *Brahma's kamandalu * was not sufficient, he was doing *Abhisheka * with that; in order to complete that *Abhisheka, Dharma * itself took the form of water; that was also not sufficient; when the Cosmic Egg was broken, waters which were outside also came through that opening in the Egg, touched the Feet of Vishnu, and came to the world, and became *Gangaa*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 109:   
Vaama paadaambuja angushta nakha sroto vinirgataam |   
Vishnoh bibharti yaam bhaktyaa shirasaa aharnisham dhruvah ||*** From the toe of the left foot of *Bhagavaan Vishnu*, the water came through the nails. Page **157** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **these waters are held by *Dhruva * with great devotion day and night. Everyday he bears it on his head. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha dhruvaadi paataalaantam avateerna gangaa prashamsaa vaama paadaa iti   
|*** This is told to praise *Gangaa * river. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 110:   
Tatah saptarshayo yasyaah praanaayaama paraayanaah |   
Tishthanti veechi maalaabhih uhyamaana jataa jale ||*** *Saptarshis * are always engaged in *praanaayaama, japa, dhyaana*. They take sacred bath in this *Gangaa * river, where their *jataa * is getting drenched with the *Gangaa * waters. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tata iti | \* Vishnoh pade parame madhva utsah, iti mantra anugruhyate |   
Oohyamaana jataajala iti saptarsheenaam aghamarshana snaana sukha   
aadhikya uktih | ****Shruti * says that *Vishnu's Paada*, there is a spring of honey or nectar at the Feet, this is sacred and so enjoyable that all *Saptarshis * telling *Aghamarshana Sookta*, are enjoying and getting purified by the water. They experience great joy in taking bath in *Gangaa **jala*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 111:   
Vaaryoghaih santataih yasyaah plaavitam shashimandalam |   
Bhooyo adhikataraam kaantim vahati etat ahakshaye ||*** Floods of water are going and drenching the *Chandra Mandala * itself. *Chandra **Mandala * gets more brightness and lustre, in the night, because of this. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 112:   
Meruprushthe patati ucchaih nishkraantaa shashi mandalaat |   
Jagatah paavanaarthaaya prayaati cha chaturdisham ||*** From the *Chandra Mandala*, it is falling from great height, on the *Meru parvata. **Gangaa * river falling from *Chandra Mandala*, goes in all four directions, in order to purify the whole world. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Meru prushta iti | Shashi mandalaat nishkraantaa soorya maargaat merum gataa   
iti arthah | \* Vishnu paadaat shishumaaraat dhruvaat cha somaat sooryaat meru   
kootaat cha vishnoh | Samaagataa shiva moordhno himaadrim \* ityaadi vyaasa   
ukteh |*** From *Chandra Mandala*, through *Soorya*, it comes into the *Meru parvata. Vyaasa * has Page **158** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **told that from *Vishnu Paada*, it reaches *Shimshumaara*, from there *Dhruva*, from there *Soma *\( *Chandra Mandala*\), then *Soorya*, then *Meru parvata*. Then it comes to the *shiras * of *Shiva*, in the *jataa*, then to the *Himaalayaas*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 113:   
Seetaa cha alakanandaa cha chakshurbhadraa cha samsthitaa |   
Ekaa eva yaa chaturbhedaa dik bheda gati lakshanaa ||*** Four streams of *Gangaa * are *Seetaa, Alakananda, Chakshu, Bhadraa*. One *Gangaa * divides into four, because of going in different directions. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 114:   
Bhedam cha alakandaakhyam yasyaah sharvo api dakshinam |   
Dadhaara shirasaa preetyaa varshaanaam adhikam shatam ||*** That stream called *Alakananda * in the southern direction, *Shiva * bears it for more than 100 years on the *shiras*, with great love. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 115:   
Shambhoh jataa kalaapaat cha vinishkraantaa asti sharkaraah |   
Plaavayitvaa divam ninye yaa paapaan sagara aatmajaan ||*** From *Shambhu jataa, Ganga * comes out; just as a river submerges all small pebbles, the remains of *Sagara's * 60,000 children, *Saagaraas, Gangaa * comes and purifies them and they get rid of all sins. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shambhoh iti | Sharkaraah - nadyantah sookshma shilaah; taa iva saagara   
astheeni plaavayitvaa | ****Sharkaraah * are small pebbles in the river. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 116:   
Snatasya salike yasyaah sadyah paapam pranashyati |   
Apoorva punya praaptih cha sadyo maitreya jaayate || ***One who takes bath in that, immediately, all his sins get destroyed. O Maitreya, immediately, they also get a lot of virtues, *punyaas*, which they had never attained earlier. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 117:   
Dattah pitrubhyo yatraapah tanayaih shraddhayaa anvitaih |   
Samaashatam prayacchanti truptim maitreya durlabhaam ||*** If children give *tarpana*, with the waters of *Gangaa*, the forefathers, manes, attain *trupti*, satisfied for hundreds of years, which is impossible to attain. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 118:   
Yasya abhishtvaa mahaa yajnyaih yajnyesham purushottamam | ***Page **159** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Dvijabhoopaah paraam siddhim avaapuh dive cha iha cha ||*** Using the waters of *Gangaa*, if they do *mahaa yajnyaas*, and worship *Purushottama*, the One who is *aaraadhya * by these *yajnyaas, Yajnyesha*. *brahmins * obtain great benefits and *purushaarthaas*, in this as well as other worlds. 



This is telling how sacred and holy the *Gangaa * waters are. One who does *tarpana*, does *yajnya*, takes bath, all attain great benefit. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 119:   
Snaanaat vidhoota paapaah cha yat jalaih yatayah tathaa |   
Keshava aasakta manasah praaptaa nirvaanam uttamam ||*** One who takes bath gets rid of all the sins. The sages took bath there and got rid of all sins. They were meditating on *Keshava*, attained *Nirvaana*, great *aananda*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 120:   
Shruta abhilaashitaa drushtaa sprushtaa peetaa avagaahitaa |   
Yaa paavayati bhootaani keertitaa cha dine dine || ***Whether one hears about the greatness of the river *Gangaa*, or one gets a desire to take bath in *Gangaa * river, or one who sees the *Gangaa * itself, or one who touches the waters of *Gangaa*, one who drinks the waters of sacred *Gangaa*, one who does *avagaaha snaana * in it, one who even praises the great qualities and powers of the river *Gangaa*, all of them get purified, and sins get destroyed. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shruta iti | Shruta abhilaashitaa iti aadou aasakti bhooyastvaat phala   
bhooyastvam yathaa uttaram dasha gunam | Yathaa brahmaanda puraane \*   
Shrutaa gangaa iti yaih bhaktyaa sakrut doore sthitaih api | Tatra eva taarayet   
martyaan karunaardraa bhavaarnavaat || Kadaa drakshyaami taam gangaam   
kadaa snaanam aham labhe || iti pumsaa abhilaashitaa kulaani dasha taarayet   
| Yathaa kathanchit yaih drushtaa bhaktitah chinmayee sakrut | Gangaa   
taarayate teshaam shatamamhasah | Yaih tu sprushtaa vishishtaangaa gangaa   
bhaktyaa sakrut naraih | Kulaanaam tu sahasram vai teshaam taarayate   
bhavaat | Peetaa dharmadravee martyaih yaih gangaa bhaktitah sakrut |   
Teshaam kulaanaam ayutam bhavaat taarayate dhruvam || Yaih punya   
vaahinee gangaa sakrut bhaktyaa avagaahitaa | Teshaam kulaanaam laksham tu   
bhavaat taarayate dhruvam || Yaih dinam sevitaa bhaktyaa gangaa punya jalaa   
naraih || Kulaanaam dasha laksham tu teshaam taarayate bhavaat |*** *Shruta, abhilaashitaa, drushtaa, sprushtaa, peetaa, avagaahitaa *- one after the other, what is told, for everyone, the next one is due to great desire. One who hears about the *Gangaa * gets a great desire to see, take bath. One who has a great desire, goes and touches the waters, the next step is to drink the waters of *Gangaa*. For each step, the next step gets ten times more benefit; the fruits they attain are ten times of the previous one. This is told in *Brahmaanda Puraana*, those who are standing away Page **160** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **from the river also, but one who hears about *Gangaa * with devotion, there itself, *Gangaa * river, out of great compassion, makes them get rid of *samsaara * itself. "When will I see the *Gangaa * river, when will I get an opportunity to take bath in *Gangaa*?", one who desires like this, for such a person, ten *kulaas * of his will be blessed. For whatever reason one sees with great devotion the *Gangaa * river, *Gangaa * destroys the sins of hundred *kulaas* of such a person. Those who touch the waters of the river with great devotion, even once, *Gangaa * will bless thousand *kulaas * of them to cross over the *samsaara*. Dharma itself has taken the form of water, the *Gangaa * river, one who drinks that with great devotion, even once, *Gangaa * will make sure that ten thousand *kulaas * of them will cross over the ocean of *samsaara*, this is for sure. In the sacred river *Gangaa*, with great devotion, when one does *Avagaaha snaana *\(completely immersing in the waters\), one lakh *kulaas * of them will be blessed with crossing over the *samsaara*. Those who do *seva * every day with great devotion, and drink the sacred waters, ten lakh *kulaas * of them will cross over *samsaara*. This is the greatness of *Gangaa * told in *Brahmaanda **Puraana*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 121:   
Gangaa gangaa iti yat naama yojanaanaam shateshu api |   
Sthiteh ucchaaritam hanti paapam janma traya aarjitam || ***Those who are even hundred *yojanaas * away from *Gangaa * river, if they tell thrice as " *Gangaa Gangaa Gangaa*", they will be freed from sins accumulated from three *janmaas*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Gangaa gangaa iti | Dviruktih pratisandhyam cha trigaavrutteh vruddhi arthaa |   
Brahmaande \* Gangaa gangaa iti gangaa iti yaih trishandhyam trireeritam |   
Sudoorasthaih cha tat paapam hanti janma trayaarjitam | Tathaa \* Sahasra   
yojanastho api trishandhyam trih samaahitah | Gangaa gangaa iti yo brooyaat   
sa gacchet paramaam gatim | Naama upalakshanam smaranasya api, \*   
Yojanaanaam sahasreshu gangaam yah smarate narah | Api dushkruta karmaa   
asou labhate paramaam gatim | iti maatsya ukteh |*** In the *Praatah Sandhyaa, Madhyahnika Sandhyaa * and *Saayam Sandhyaa*, if some says as " *Gangaa Gangaa Gangaa*", even if located hundreds of *yojanaas * away from *Gangaa * river, for three *janmaas*, whatever *paapas * are accumulated, that will be completely destroyed. This is told in *Brahmaanda Puraana*. Even though located far away from the river. Even if situated 1000 *yojanaas * away, if one says with devotion during the three *sandhyaa kaalaas*, he will attain *Parama Gati*. Telling the name is also indicative of thinking of *Gangaa*. One who thinks of the *Gangaa * river, even though located thousands of *yojanaas * away, though he has done lots of sins, he will attain great worlds, is told in *Maatsya Puraana*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 8, Shloka 122: ***Page **161** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Yatah saa paavanaayaalam trayaanaam jagataam api |   
Samudbhootaa param tat tu truteeyam bhagavat padam ||*** Because *Gangaa * river is sufficient for purifying all the three worlds, which has come from the *Bhagavaan's Paada*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yata iti | Yata iti prakruta vishnu pada maahaatmya upasamhaarah |   
Trayaanaam iti paataala vyaaptih cha uktaa saagara uddhaara arthaa | Tu   
shabdo alpa maahaatmya nadyantara utpatti sthaanaat sarahshailadrumaadeh   
vailakshanam vishnu padasya vadan gangaam utkarshayati; gangaayaa   
nadyantara saamya darshino dosha smruteh - gangaayaam vaishnavee shaktou   
nadyantara vibhaavanaam | Prakruvanti cha ye martyaa na taih tu saha   
samvaset || Nadee iti na asammantavyaa iti hi bhavishyat vaakyam |*** The conclusion is that all the greatness of *Gangaa * has come because she has emerged from the *Paada * of *Sri Mahaavishnu*. This conclusion is told to tell about the greatness of the *Paada. Paataala * is also included in the three *lokaas*, and this is to give good *gati * to *Sagara's * children. *Gangaa * river has come from *Vishnu Pada*; there are so many rivers originating from places of very little significance compared to the sacred feet of *Saakshat Mahaa Vishnu*. They originate from some other river, or from a hill, which are very insignificant compared to the *Paada * of *Mahaa Vishnu*; this is indicated by *'tu' shabda. Gangaa * cannot be compared with ordinary rivers. Those who compare *Gangaa * river with other ordinary rivers, they commit sin, *dosha. Gangaa * has got *Vaishnavee Shakti*, coming from *Vishnu Paada*; those who think that *Gangaa * is similar to other rivers, one should not live with, or come in contact with such people. *Gangaa * should not even be told as *nadi, Gangaa * is so sacred; this is told in *Bhavishyat Puraana*. 



This brings us to a close of *Amsha * 2, Chapter 8. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Dviteeye Amshe Ashtamo Adhyaayah Samaaptah ||   
   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Dviteeye Amshe Ashtamo   
Adhyaayah || ***



*** ***Page **162** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****   
|| Atha Navamo Adhyaayah ||   
Shimshumaara, Divya Snaana*** 



Now, Chapter 9. 



*Sri Paraasharar* starts to tell about the *Nakshatra Mandala*, what is controlling what, what is supported by what, etc. 


