+++
title = "11"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 1:    
Maitreyah -   
Yat etat bhagavaan aaha ganah saptavidho raveh |   
Mandale hima taapaadeh kaaranam tanmayaa shrutam ||*** *Maitreyar *- O *Bhagavaan Paraashara*, whatever you told so far, about the seven groups of *Mandala ganaas*, seven types of groups of people who are there, and also the cause of *hima, taapa*, was also told. I listened to that. ***   


## 2
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 2:    
Vyaapaarah cha api kathito gandharava uraga rakshasaam |   
Risheenaam vaalakhilyaanaam tathaa eva apsararasaam guro ||*** The *gandharvaas, sarpaas, raakshasaas*, what all they do was also told by you. Whatever the *rishis * do, the *Vaalakhilyaas * do, the *apsarases * do, ... 





## 3
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 3:    
Yakshaanaam cha rathe bhaanoh vishnu shakti dhruta aatmanaam |   
Kim cha aadityasya yat karma tat na uktam tvayaa mune ||*** ... the *yakshaas*, all these who are there on the chariot of the Sun, are being supported by the power of Vishnu. You did not tell me about what *Aaditya * does. 



*Paraasharar * said that the *rishis * will be praising the Sun, *Gandharvaas * will be singing, *Apsarases * will be dancing, *Raakshasaas * are following the Sun, *Sarpaas * are all carrying the Sun, *Yakshaas * are taking care of the girdle, *Vaalakhilyaas * are following the Sun all around. ***   


## 4
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 4:    
Yadi saptagano vaari himam ushnam cha varshati |   
Tat kim atra raveh yena vrushtih sooryaat iteeryate ||*** The rains, winter, snow - the seven groups of beings are responsible for all of this. The Sun is only the cause for the rains, is being told. What is the reason for that? 





## 5
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 5:    
Vivasvaan udito madhye yaati astam iti kim janah |   
Braveeti etat samam karma yadi sapta ganasya tat || ***We say that the Sun rises, that it is noon, and the Sun sets. This is being done by all the seven classes of beings, but we say that only the Sun does this. What is the Page **178** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **reason? 





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 6:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Maitreya shrooyataam etat yat bhavaan pariprucchati |   
Yathaa sapta gane api ekah praadhaanyena adhiko raveh || ****Sri Paraasharar *- O *Maitreyar*, please listen to what I will tell you, what you are asking. Though there are seven classes, the Sun is the primary one, the most prominent one there. ***   


## 7
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 7:    
Sarvashaktih paraa vishnoh rik yajuh saama sanjnitaa |   
Saa eshaa trayee tapati amho jagatah cha hinasti yaa ||*** *Vishnu shakti * is being told here, it is known by the name of *Rig, Yajus, Saama*. These *Vedaas * only are causing brightness of the Sun. This destroys all the sins of the people of the world. 



*Rig, Yajus, Saama * are called *Trayee*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sarvashaktih ityaadi | Sarva shaktih sampoorna shaktih, yat tapati yat cha   
jagato amho hinasti saa eshaa vishnoh paraa sarvashaktih rik yajuh saama   
sanjnitaa trayee iti anvayah | ***The complete power of *Vishnu * is told here. That supreme power of *Vishnu*, and is called by the names of *Rig, Yajus, Saama. Vishnu Shakti * stays in the Sun, and the entire world gets light because of that only, and destroys the sins of all. He is present in the inner self of the Sun. ***   


## 8
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 8:    
Saa eshaa vishnuh stitah sthityaam jagatah paalanaa udyatah |   
Rik yajuh saama bhooto antah savituh dvija tishthati ||*** *Vishnu*, who is engaged in the sustenance of the world, and nurturing the whole world; this *shakti * of *Vishnu * which is present in all the seven classes present in the Suns *ratha*, it is in abundance on the Sun only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Saa eshaa iti | Jagatah paalanaa udyatah sthityaam sthito vishnuh sa vai   
shaktih | Shaktishaktimatoh abhedaat saamaanaadhikaranya nirdeshah | Rik   
yajuh saama shareero vishnuh savituh antah tishthati; ato raveh praadhaanyam   
| ****Vishnu shakti * only is engaged in the sustenance of the world. *Vishnu * has the three *Vedaas * as His *shareera*. This is told as " *Yasya Vedaah shareeram*". This is also told in the *Upanishads, "Yat aatmaano vedaas*", they are all supported by Him; though *Vedaas * are eternal, and remains in the *jnyaana * of *Paramaatman * during *pralaya*, He only protects it and teaches it to *Chaturmukha Brahma * during *srushti*, and then the *pravartana * is continued. When Page **179** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **they say *shareera*, it is *Vedaabhimaani devataa. Shakti * and *Vishnu * are to be addressed in the same *vibhakti*, with coordination; in *saamaanaadhikaranya nirdesha*; because the power and one who has the power - both are one only. *Shareera * is not like hand and leg, but it is because of the three relations - *aadhaara - aadheya **bhaava, niyaamaka - niyaamya bhaava, sheshi - shesha bhaava*; this is *shareera-**shareeri bhaava. Shareera * is said to be *dravya; Vedaas * are said to be *shareera*, so the *Vedaabhimaani devataa * can be taken. *Vishnu * is present as *antaryaami*, the Inner Self of the Sun. Therefore, the prominence for the Sun. Sun only is addressed in all the acts. ***   


## 9
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 9:    
Maasi maasi ravih yo yah tatra tatra hi saa paraa |   
Trayeemayee vishnu shaktih avasthaanam karoti vai ||*** Whoever is the *Aaditya * in every month, *Vishnu * is present as inner self or *antaryaami*, and that is only responsible for their powers and functioning. 



First, *Paraasharar * tells that *Bhagavaan * is only present as *antaryaami, **Sooryanaaraayana * present as *antaryaami * of the Sun. 





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 10:    
Ruchah stuvanti poorvaahne madhyaahne atha yajoomshi vai |   
Bruhadratahantaraadeeni saamaani ahnah kshaye ravim ||*** That *Sooryanaaraayana * is praised by the *Rig Veda * at the early morning time, the *Yajurveda * in the afternoon, and by the *Saamaveda *\( *Bruhadratahantara * and others\) in the evening. 



*Shruti * also says this. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ruchah iti | Ruchah stuvanti, ravou tishthantam vishnum iti sheshah | ****Rigveda * and others praise the Sun, but the *antaryaami * of the Sun, *Sooryanaaraayana*. ***   


## 11
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 11:    
Angameshaa trayee vishno rik yajuh saama sanjnitaa |   
Vishnu shaktih avasthaanam sadaa aaditye karoti saa ||*** The three *Vedaas*, known as *Rig, Yajus, Saama*, is a part of *Vishnu * Himself. *Anga * also means *shareera * here. This is always present in the Sun. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Anga iti | Anga shakti shabdou shareera paryaayou \* Shabda moorti dharasya   
etat roopam iti hi uktam | Amsha eshaa iti cha paathah | ****Anga * and *shakti * mean *shareera. Anga * means *shareera shareeri bhaava*. There is another *paathaantara, amsha esha*. 



*Bhagavad Ramanuja * shows in various works - *Vedarthasangraha, Sribhashya *- that many words are used to denote *shareera - tanu, vapu, shakti, amsha, aatma, *Page **180** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***shareera * itself. 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 12:    
Na kevalam raveh shaktih vaishnavee saa trayeemayee |   
Brahma atha purusho rudrah trayam etat trayeemayam || ***This kind of *Vishnu Shakti*, made of three *Vedaas*, is present not only in the Sun. *Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra * are also *trayee mayaas *- they are told as *Rig Veda, Yajur **Veda * and *Saama Veda maya*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Saa vaishnavee trayeemayee shaktih na kevalam raveh eva antasthaa, kintu   
brahmaadeenaam api iti aaha - na kevalam iti | ***





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 13:    
Sarga aadou rungmayo brahmaa sthitou vishnuh yajurmayah |   
Rudrah saamamayo antaaya tasmaat tasya ashuchih dhvanih || ****Chaturmukha Brahma * being *Rig Veda maya*, does the creation. During sustenance, *Vishnu * will be *Yajur veda maya. Rudra * being *Saama veda maya*, does the dissolution. These are the *Vishnu shaktis * present in *Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva*. They do all the functioning with that power. Because *Saama Veda * is used for dissolution, *Paraasharar * says that it is *ashuchi, ashuddhi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sarga aadou iti | Tasmaat anta hetu rudra sambandhaat, tasya saamnah | ***Being connected with *Rudra*, who does the dissolution, *Paraasharar * calls *Saama **dhvani * as *ashuddhi*. 



*Saama Veda * is praised everywhere - *Vedaanaam Saamavedo Asmi, Bhagavad Gita*, Chapter 10. But here, as *Rudra * being *Saama Veda maya * does the dissolution, *Paraasharar * is telling that it is *ashuchi*. 





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 14:    
Evam saa saatvikee shaktih vaishnavee yaa trayeemayee |   
Aatma sapta ganastham tam bhaasvantam adhitishthati || ***The *saatvika shakti * of *Vishnu*, which is made of three *Vedaas*, along with the seven groups of people who are there, including Him, presides over the Sun. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Upasamharati evam iti | Saatvikee shuddha sattva mayee vaishnavee shaktih,   
aatma sapta ganastham sva shareera bhoota sapta varga antargatam   
bhaasvantam adhitishthati - bhaasvati atishayena tishthati | ****Saatvika shakti * means *sattva * is *shuddha sattva maya*, which is *apraakruta * or *divya*. They are all *Bhagavaan's shareera*, along with the Sun, who is a part of the seven classes. It is excelling, present there. 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 15:  ***Page **181** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Tayaa cha adhisthitah sah api jaajavalee iti sva rashmibhih |   
Tamah samasta jagataam naasham nayati cha akhilam ||*** Being presided over by the supreme *Saatvika shakti * of *Vishnu*, the Sun is burning bright. He destroys all the world's darkness, burning bright with his rays. 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 16:    
Stuvanti cha enam munayo gandharvaih geeyate purah |   
Nrutyanti apsaraso yaanti tasya cha anu nishaacharaah ||*** All the *rishis * are always praising him, doing His *stotra. Gandharvaas * are singing songs. *Apsarases * are all dancing in front. The *raakshasaas * all go following him. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 17:    
Vahanti panaagaa yakshaih kriyate abheeshu sangrahah |   
Vaalakhilyaah tathaa eva enam parivaarya samaasate ||*** The *sarpaas * carry the chariot, and the *yakshaas * do that part of the work told, which is the girdle. The *Vaalakhilya Rishis*, surrounding him are praising him. They all bring *atishaya * to the Sun. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Praadhaanyaat anye api stuti aadyaih enam upaasate iti aaha - stuvanti cha   
enam iti | ***Why are all the *rishis* praising him, *Gandharvaas * are singing to praise him, *Apsarases * are dancing, *raakshasaas * are following him? It is because of the prominence of the Sun. ***   


## 18
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 18:    
Nodetaa na astametaa cha kadaachit shakti roopadhruk |   
Vishnuh vishnoh pruthak tasya ganah saptavidho apyayam ||*** It is said that the *Vishnu shakti*; being presided by His power, all the seven classes keep moving the Sun, changing every month. *Vishnu shakti * that presides does not have any rise or setting. Because it is different and distinct from all others, which are presided over by it. *Vishnu * is taking on the form of the Supreme Power. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na iti | Shakti roopadhruk vishnuh adhishthaataa sthaayee nodeti na astam iti,   
adhishtyaat sanchaarino ganaat bhinnatvaat |*** He is the one who is the Presiding Deity. He is present without any changes. Because He is very different and distinct from all the other classes which are being presided over by Him. 





## 19
*Sri Paraasharar * gives an example. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 19:    
Stambhastha darpanasya iti yo ya aasannataam narah |   
Chaayaa darshana samyogam sa sa praapnoti athaatmanah || ***There is a mirror near the pole. Whoever comes near the pole, they see their reflection there. The mirror and pole remains same, whoever keep coming and Page **182** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **moving, they see their image there. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Stambhastha iti | Chaayaa darshana samyogam chaayaayaah pratibimbasya   
aadarshanasya darpanasya cha samyogam | ***





## 20
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 20:    
Evam saa vaishnavee shaktih na eva apaiti tato dvija |   
Maasa anumaasam bhaasvantam adhyaaste tatra samstitam || ***Like this, the *Vaishnavi shakti * does not set or rise. Though the seven classes keep changing every month, the *Vaishnavi shakti * presides over the Sun, being present there all the time, without any change. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Evam iti | Tatah darpana sthaaneeyaat soorya padaadhikaarinah, tatra   
sooryapade maasa anumaasam maasaan maasaantaram prati maasam iti arthah   
| Punkhaanupunkham itivat | Yat vaa maaseshu dvaadasheshu anumaase   
adhikamaase cha; tena yo maaso adhikah tan maasa ukta sapta gana aavruttih   
syaat |*** *Vishnu shakti * is in the form of the mirror, as Sun's *antaryaami*, and all others keep coming and going. It is going one continuously month by month. There are *nyoona **maasa, adhika maasa*. 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 21:    
Pitru deva manushyaadeen sa sadaa aapyaayan prabhuh |   
Parivartati aho raatra kaaranam savitaa dvija ||*** The Sun keeps on moving, being the cause of day and night. He keeps pleasing the *pitru ganaas, devaas * and *manushyaas*. 





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 22:    
Soorya rashmih sushumnaa yah tarpitah tena chandramaah |   
Krushnapakshe amaraih shashvat peeyate vai sudhaamayah ||*** There is a *Soorya rashmi * called *Sushumnaa*, one of the rays of the Sun. Sun is being nurtured by that. In the *Krushna paksha*, he is continuously being drunk, or enjoy the nectar in the moon. They enjoy or drink him during the *Krushna paksha*. He is full of nectar. The brightness of moon is said to be nectar which is fed by the Sun, through the *Sushumnaa rashmi*. 



Even in the *Shruti*, the names of the Sun appear. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Pitraadyaapyaayana prakaaram aaha soorya rashmih iti | Tarpitah shukla   
pratipada aadikramaat pooritah peeyate | Pratipadaadipaanam hi kshaya   
hetuh, atah shodasha kalasya krushna pratipadam aarabhya ekaikaa kalaa   
amaraih peeyate, \* prathamaam pibate vanhih itiyaadi smruteh | ***How it is being done is going to be told here. He pleases everyone, the *pitru ganaas, *Page **183** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***deva ganaas, manushyaas * and also being the cause of day and night. In the *shukla **paksha*, from *pratipat * onwards, moon keeps on increasing day by day by one *kalaa*, part. Sun feeds the moon with nectar during the *Shukla paksha*. Consuming this nectar from the Sun is only going to be the cause of his decrease in the *Krushna paksha*. Starting with the *Krushna paksha*, one *kalaa*, part every day is being consumed by the *devataas*. Who drinks what is told in the *Smrutis*. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 23:    
Peetam tam dvikalam somam krushna paksha kshaye dvija |   
Pibanti pitarah teshaam bhaaskaraat tarpanam tathaa || ***Out of the 16, for 14 days, they consume one by one all the *kalaas * of *Chandra*. There will be two parts which will be left at the end of the *Krushna paksha*. Out of that, one *kalaa * is consumed by the *Pitrus*; this is how they get *tarpana * from Sun. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Peetam iti | Atah krushna chaturdashyante dvi kalatvam, krushna paksha kshaye   
- darshe pibanti eka kalaa varjam; teshaam deva pitruunaam, tathaa ukta   
prakaarena |*** At the end of *Krushna chaturdashi*, he has got two *kalaas*. In *Amaavaasya*, leaving one *kalaa*, part, they drink the remaining. This is how the *devaas * and *pitrus * are being fed and then pleased by the Sun. 



This is how the Sun himself feeds everyone, is told. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 24:    
Aadatte rashmibhih yam tu kshiti samstham rasam ravih |   
Tam utsrujati bhootaanaam pushti artham sasya vruddhaye ||*** Through his rays, the Sun draws all water in the earth. And he again throws it down in the form of rain, in order to nurture and be the cause of the growth of the beings, people, and also for the plants, herbs, twiners, etc. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Manushyaadi tarpanam aaha aadatta iti | Bhootaanaam manushyaadeenaam | ***





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 25:    
Tena preenaati asheshaani bhootaani bhagavaan ravih |   
Pitru deva manushyaadeen evam aapyaayati asou || ***This way, the Sun pleases all the beings. This is how he pleases and nurtures all the *pitrus, devaas * and *manushyaas*. 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 11, Shloka 26:    
Pakshatruptim tu devaanaam pitruunaam chaiva maasikeem |   
Shashvat truptim cha martyaanaam maitreya arkah prayacchati ||*** *Devaas * get *trupti * in the *paksha, pitrus * every month, all the time, the *manushyaas * are being fed. 



Page **184** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **This is also told in the *Shrutis*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Deva pitru martyaanaam truptim kaalato vishinashti - paksha iti | \* Shukle   
poornam krushne pibanti devaah, iti teshaam shukla pakshe truptih | Eka   
maasikeem poorva darshaat uttara darsham yaavat | Yat vaa devaanaam   
darsha poornamaasayoh ishtih, pitruunaam darsha eva ishtih, manushyaanaam   
nitya bhuktih cha, tat tat saadhana havirnishpattih soorya saadhyaa iti dina   
paksha aadi truptih, \* Tasmaat ahah ahah manushyaah ityaadi shruteh | Arkah   
prayacchati iti punah keertanaat grahaanta krutam vrushti aadi phalam api tat   
tat taaraa graha anugraahaka rashmi dvaaraa arka eva prayacchati iti uktam   
syaat | Yathaa kourme \* Harikeshah tu yah prokto rashmih nakshatra poshakah   
| Vishvakarmaa tathaa rashmih budham pushnaati sarvadaa | Vishvavyachaa   
soorya rashmih sitam pushnaati nityashah | Samyadvasuh iti khyaato yah sa   
pushnaati lohitam | Bruhaspatim sa pushnaati rashmih arvaavasuh prabhoh |   
Shanaishcharam sa pushnaati saptamah tu svaraahvayah | iti | ***In which time he does *trupti * of *devaas, pitrus, manushyaas * is told here. In the *Shukla **paksha*, the moon is fed by the Sun. And in *Krushna paksha*, they consume that. One month means one *Amaavaasyaa * to the next *Amaavaasyaa*. For *devaas*, the *ishti * is done on *Amaavaasya * and *Pournami*. *Pitrus * are worshipped only during *Amaavaasya*. Humans are being fed all the time. The *havis * required for all these *tarpanaas, yajnya **yaagaadikaas, darsha poornamaasa, pitru tarpana*, are all due to the Sun. Sun causes rains. Sun only gives, is told again. In various other planets also, there are rains happening; these are also because of the Sun only. All other planets, in order to do *anugraha * for them, to grace them, the various rays of the Sun are told to be responsible for all that. It is told in *Koorma Puraana*, there is one ray, *rashmi * called *Harikesha*, which feeds the *nakshatraas*, the stars. There is another ray called *Vishvakarma*, which feeds *Budha. Vishvavyacha * is one which feeds *Shukra*. There is one called *Samyadvasu * which feeds the *lohita graha, Mangala. Bruhaspati*, Jupiter is fed by *Arvaavasu*. There is another called *Svaraahvaya * which feeds Saturn. 



In *Shruti * also, these names are told. Various rays of the Sun are feeding various other planets. 



This concludes Chapter 11 of *Amsha * 2. ***   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Dviteeye Amshe Ekaadasho Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Sri Vishnu Chitteeye Dviteeye Amshe   
Ekaadasho Adhyaayah ||   
   
 ***Page **185** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****   
|| Atha Dvaadasho Adhyaayah ||   
Moon, Samaanaadhikaranya, Asti-Naasti Shabdaas*** 



Now, the Chapter 12. Now, *Sri Paraasharar * is going to talk about the chariots of the moon and other planets. *** ***
