+++
title = "12"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 1:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Rathah tri chakrah somasya kundaabhaah tasya vaajinah |   
Vaama dakshinato yuktaah dasha tena charati asou ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- The Moon's chariot has got three wheels, the horses are shining like \(or have the fragrance of\) the jasmine flowers, they are tied on the left and right sides, and there are ten horses. 





## 2
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 2:    
Veethi aashrayaani rukshaani dhruvaadhaarena veginaa |   
Haasa vruddhi kramah tasya rashmeenaam savituh yathaa || ***The *nakshatraas * are all supported by *Naaga veethi * and this is supported by *Dhruva*. Riding the chariot which has *Dhruva * as the *aadhaara*, support, he traverses along with the *nakshatraas * located along the *Naaga veethi*. Just like Sun's rays, even the Moon's rays increase and decrease during the rising time and setting time. ***   


## 3
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 3:    
Arkasya eva hi tasya ashvaah sakruth yuktaa vahanti te |   
Kalpam ekam muni shreshtha vaari garbha samudbhavaah ||*** The horses of the Moon are born of waters, and just like the horses of the Sun, they are tied only once to the chariot and they carry on the chariot till the end of the *kalpa*. For the entire duration of the *kalpa*, they carry the chariot of the Moon. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Arkasya eva iti | Vaari garbha samudbhavaah jala mayaah, \* Vaari garbha   
samudbhooto rathah sa-ashvah sa-saarathih iti aaditya puraane | ***They are born of water, so they are *jala maya*. This is told in *Aaditya Puraana*. 





## 4
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 4:    
Ksheenam peetam suraih somam aapyaayayati deeptimaan |   
Maitreya eka kalam santam rashminaa ekena bhaaskarah ||*** During *Shukla Paksha*, whatever the Sun feeds, all the *devaas * are eating away one *kalaa * at a time, and it is nectar for them. This way, the Moon which has lost all its brightness, in *Krushna Paksha*, is left with only one *kalaa*. Through one particular ray, the Sun feeds it again, and pleases the Moon. 



Page **186** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ksheenam iti | Ksheenam alpeebhoota shukla kalam | Tat uktam \* Devaih   
sapeeyamaanasya shuklaa vardhanti vai kalaah | Somasya krushna pakshaadou   
bhaaskara abhimukhasya tu | Praksheeyante apare bhaage peeyamaanaah kalaa   
kramaat | ityaadi | Aapyaayaayati shukla kalaa vardhayati \* Sushumnaa   
aapyaayamaanasya shukle vardhanti vai kalaa iti |*** The brightness of the moon reduced is *ksheenam*. In the *Shukla paksha*, the Sun is nurturing and feeding the Moon. In the *Krushna paksha*, this reduces because they are being drunk by the *devaas*. Through the *Sushumnaa * ray, the Sun feeds and makes the Moon brighter and brighter, one *kalaa * every single day. 





## 5
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 5:    
Kramena yena peeto asou devaih tena nishaakaram |   
Aapyaayaayati anudinam bhaaskaro vaari taskarah || ****Bhaaskara*, who steals the waters, feeds the Moon every single day. The brightness of the Moon decreases every day being eaten away by the *devaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kramena iti | Yena kramena iti | Krushna pakshe yat thitou bimbasya yat   
bhaage yaavaan hraasah shukle tat bhaage taavati eva vruddhih iti | Taskarah   
alakshitam hartaa | ***In the *Krushna paksha*, whichever part is reducing, in the same order, the Sun keeps on feeding him in the *Shukla paksha*, one *kalaa * at a time. *Taskara * is told as someone who steals, where we don't even know. Like this, the Sun is stealing the waters. 





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 6:    
Sambhrutam cha ardhamaasena tat somastham sudhaamrutam |   
Pibanti devaa maitreya sudhaahaaraa yato amaraah || ****Devaas * are told to be *amaraas*, and have partaken the nectar, ambrosia, *Amruta*. This *Amruta * is consumed from the Moon, it is said; that *Amruta*, which is accumulated in the Moon during the *Shukla paksha*. Because, for the *devaas*, that *Amruta * only is the food. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Subhrutam iti | Sudhaamrutam sushtu dheeyate peeyate iti sudhaa, saa eva   
amrutam |*** Whatever is consumed by the *devaas*, that is *Amruta*. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 7:    
Trayastrimshat sahasraani trayastrimshat shataani cha |   
Trayastrimshat tathaa devaah pibanti kshanadaakaram ||*** Thirty three thousand, thirty three hundred, and thirty three \(which is 36,333\) *devaas * consume the nectar from the Moon. 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 8:    
Kalaadvayaavashishtah tu pravrushtah sooryamandalam | ***Page **187** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Amaakhya rashmou vasati amaavaasyaa tatah smrutaa ||*** *Paraasharar * is telling why it is called as *Amaavaasyaa*, it means living in *Amaa*. He would be left with two *kalaas*, parts, at the end of the *Krushna Paksha*, he enters into the *Soorya Mandala*, and lives in one *rashmi * called *Amaa*. This is why it is called as *Amaavaasyaa*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kalaadvayaavashishtah iti | Pravishta iti | Tat rashmi abhibhavaat pravishta   
iva |*** 





## 9
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 9:    
Apsu tasmin ahoraatre poorvam vishati chandramaah |   
Tato veerutsu vasati prayaati arkam tatah kramaat || ***During that day, he first stays in waters. After that, he lives in plants, herbs, twiners; after that, he goes towards the Sun. 





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 10:    
Chinatti veerudho yah tu veerut samsthe nishaakare |   
Patram vaa paatayati ekam brahma hatyaam sa vindati || ***During that *Amaavaasyaa * time, when the Moon is staying in the plants, if someone cuts off a plant or a tree, or even plucks one leaf, during that time, he gets *Brahma **hatyaa dosha*, it is told. 



Therefore, it is said that during *Amaavaasyaa*, one should not pluck plants, or even *Tulasi*. 





## 11
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 11:    
Somam pancha dashe bhaage kinchit shishte kalaatmake |   
Aparaahne pitru ganaah jaghanyam paryupaasate ||*** On the 15th day, when he is left with only two *kalaas*, on the second half of the day, the *pitru ganaas * worship him, are satisfied by him. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Somam iti | Kaalaatmake pancha dashe amshe kinchit shishte darsha aparaahne,   
jaghanyam paschaat dvikalam somam pitruganaah pari upaasate | ***For the 15th part, some part is left in the second half of the *Amaavaasyaa*, when he was left with only two *kalaas*, the *pitrus * partake it. 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 12:    
Pibanti dvi kalaakaaram shishtaa tasya kalaa tu yaa |   
Sudhaamrutamayee punyaa taam indoh pitaro mune ||*** When two *kalaas * are there in the Moon, they consume only one *kalaa * from that. It is made of nectar, it is told, and is very sacred. The *pitrus * consume that one *kalaa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Pibanti iti | Kinchit shishtaa yaa panchadashee kalaa taam kalaam pitarah ***Page **188** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****pibanti na shodasheem iti arthah | ***





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 13:    
Nissrutam tat amaavaasyaam gabhastibhyah sudhaamrutaam |   
Maasam truptim avaapyaagryaam pitarah santi nirvrutaah |   
Soumyaa barhishadah cha eva agnishvaattah cha te tridhaa || ***There are three types of *pitrus, Soumyaas, Barhishadaas, Agnishvaattaas*, who consume that nectar on the *Amaavaasyaa * day. Whatever was fed from the Sun's rays to the Moon, all the *Amruta*, the *pitrus * get satisfied and are very happy, and get *trupti*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Nissrutam iti | Aaditya rashmi dvaaraa nissrutam tat sudhaamrutam peetvaa iti   
sheshah |*** Through the *Sushumnaa rashmi * of *Aaditya*, that *Amruta * which is placed in the Moon, the three kinds of *pitrus * consume, and are satisfied with that. 





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 14:    
Evam devaan site pakshe krushna pakshe tathaa pitruun |   
Veerudhah cha amrutamayaih sheetaih ap paramaanubhih ||*** This way, the Sun satisfies the *devaas * in the *Shukla paksha*, at the end of the *Krushna **paksha, pitrus * are satisfied; that which is cool and pleasant and made of the water molecules, which are like *Amruta*, the plants are fed by the Sun only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kim cha, \* Tasmaat aapooryamaana pakshe yajanta iti shruteh, \* Aparapakshe   
pitruunaam iti smruteh cha shukla krushnayoh devaan pitruun cha yaaga   
dvaarena aapyaayayati iti aaha evam iti |*** 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 15:    
Veerudhoshadhinishpattyaa manushya pashu keetakaan |   
Aapyaayayati sheeta amshuh praakaashya aahlaadanena cha || ***The plants, trees, *oshadhis*, twiners, *manushyaas, pashus, keetaas*; this way, the Moon also with his brightness, and is very pleasant, the Moon also feeds them, keeps them happy. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Veerut iti | Prakaashasya bhaavah praakaashyam, praakaashyam aahlaadanam   
cha iti dvandva ekavat bhaavah | Prakaasha aahlaadanena cha iti paathah |*** 



Now, continuing further, the various other planets, chariots, horses, are going to be described. 



We just concluded *Amsha * 2, Chapter 12, where we studied about the Moon, how the Sun gives *trupti * to everyone on the earth, through the plants, through the rains caused by the Sun. Through his rays, the *amrutamaya chandra*, the Moon, where Page **189** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **each *kalaa * is consumed by the *devaas * as *amruta*, and by the *pitrus * on the *Amaavaasyaa * day. In this way, the Sun is responsible for satisfying all of them, the *devaas, pitrus*, and the *manushyaas*. We saw the Moon's description, about how every planet has a ratha, chariot - this is going to be told now. 



The *devaas * consume *amruta * from the Moon only. During *Amaavaasya*, the *pitrus * consume. Through his *prakaasha*, as well as bringing joy to everyone, the Moon brings happiness to all the plants also, the humans, insects, etc. The Moon brings joy because of his pleasantness in the nights. 



The other planets, and their description is given next. 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 16:    
Vaayu agni dravya sambhooto rathah chandrasutasya cha |   
Pishangaih turagaih yuktah so ashtaabhih vaayuvegibhih ||*** *Chandra's * son is *Budha*, Mercury, and his chariot is made of *Vaayu * and *Agni*. The horses are of reddish brown colour, eight horses, which have the speed of *Vaayu*. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 17:    
Savaroothah sa anukarsho yukto bhoo sambhavaih hayaih |   
Sopaasangapataakah tu shukrasya api ratho mahaan || ****Shukra's * chariot is huge, tied with eight horses again, born of earth, along with the chair which protects the chariot \( *varootha*\), which covers and protects whoever is inside the chariot, with the pole below the chariot \( *anukarsha*\), the part where all the weapons are kept, and the *ratha dhvaja*. These are in *Shukra's * huge chariot. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Savaroothah iti | \* Varootho ratha guptih yaa tirodhatte rathasthitam |   
Rathasya adhah sthitam kaashtham anukarsho nigadyate | Upasango   
rathopasthah, iti |*** 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 18:    
Ashtabhih kaanchanah shreemaan bhoumasya api ratho mahaan |   
Padmaraaga arunaih ashvaih samyukto vanhi sambhavaih || ****Shukra's * chariot is of golden hue. *Angaaraka, Bhoumaa's * golden chariot, also has eight horses, red like the ruby, and are born of fire. 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 19:    
Ashtaabhih paanduraih yukto vaajibhih kaanchano rathah |   
Tasminstishthati varsham vai raashou raashou bruhaspatih ||*** *Bruhaspati * also has a gold chariot, with eight horses, of pale white colour. In each *raashi*, riding on this chariot, every year, he passes through this *raashi*. 



Page **190** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ashtaabhih iti | Raashou varsham tishthati iti tat tat graha raashi chaara   
upalakshanam |*** 





## 20
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 20:    
Aakaasha sambhavaih ashvaih shabalih syandanam yutam |   
Samaaruhya shanaih yaati mandagaamee shanaishcharah || ****Shani * or Saturn, has a chariot with eight horses, born of *Aakaasha*. They are spotted, and he travels in that slowly; he is one who moves slowly. 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 21:    
Svarbhaanoh turagaah hi ashtou bhrungaabhaa dhoosaram ratham |   
Sakrut yuktaah tu maitreya vahanti aviratam sadaa ||*** *Raahu*, his chariot also has eight horses, they have the hue of the bees, and the chariot is dusty white in colour. Once the horses are tied to the chariot, they carry the chariot without any break till the end of the *kalpa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Svarbhaanoh iti | Stoka paanduh tu dhoosarah | Aviratam avicchedam | Sadaa -   
yaavat kalpam | ***





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 22:    
Aadityaat nissruto raahuh somam gacchati parvasu |   
Aadityameti somaat cha punah soureshu parvasu || ****Raahu * emanates from the *Soorya*, and approaches the Moon during *Chandra parva, **pournami*. Again, moving away from the Moon, he approaches the Sun during *Soorya **Parva, Amaavaasya*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aadityaat iti | Arkendvoh upari truteeya dyu sthaane charannapi raahuh   
chandrasya arkasya vaa grahana kaale adho gatvaa bhoo cchaayaatmakam tamo   
mayam bimbam gruheetvaa tena tou \(raahuh\) meghavat cchaadayan tat kaala   
eva drushyatvameti | Yathaa kourmaadishu \* Svarbhaanostu gruhasthaanam   
truteeyam yat tamomayam | Tulyah tayo astu svarbhaanuh bhootvaa adhastaat   
prasarpati | ityaadi |*** *Raahu * keeps moving between Moon and Sun alternately, during the *Paksha kaalaas*. He moves in the third place, full of darkness above the Sun. During *grahana kaala*, he moved down, and covers the Sun like a cloud, and has a dark shade. Above the Sun, in the third place in the *Aakaasha*; during the eclipse time, he comes down, covers like a shade on the earth. During that time only he is seen. This is also told in the *Koorma Puraana*. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 23:  ***Page **191** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Tathaa ketu rathasya ashvaa api ashtou vaata ramhasah |   
Palaala dhooma varnaabhaa laakshaarasa nibhaarunaah ||*** In the same way, *Ketu's * chariot also has eight horses, moving at the speed of *Vaayu*. It has the hue of smoke, seen when the stars are burnt. The colour is reddish like wax. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 24:    
Ete mayaa grahaanam vai tava aakhyaataa rathaa nava |   
Sarve dhruve mahaabhaaga prabaddhaa vaayu rashmibhih ||*** All the nine planets - the nine chariots, I have told you now; *Paraasharar * tells *Maitreyar*. All of them are tied to *Dhruva*, through the reins made of *Vaayu*. 





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 25:    
Graharksha taaraadhishnyaani dhruve baddhaani asheshatah |   
Bhramati uchita chaarena maitreya anila rashmibhih || ***All the *grahaas, nakshatraas, vimaanaas*, all are tied through the aerial cords, made of *Vaayu*, to *Dhruva*. They are moving at their own specific speeds, held by the aerial cords. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Graheti | Dhishnyaani vimaanaani | Uchita chaarena \* Souro angiraah cha   
shukrascha jnyeyaa manda prachaarinah | Soorya somou budhah cha eva   
sheeghraghaah \* ityaadi koorma ukta sva sva gatyaa saha prayangmukham   
bhramanti |*** Some of them are moving slowly - *Shani, Angiras * and *Shukra*. Sun, Moon, *Budha * are moving at a higher speed. It is told in the *Koorma Puraana * that they are rotating at their own specific speeds. 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 26:    
Yaavantyaah cha eva taaraah taa taavanto vaata rashmayah |   
Sarve dhruve nibaddhaah te bhramanto bhraamayanti tam ||*** As many stars are there, so many aerial cords are there, they are all tied to *Dhruva*. When they are all rotating around *Dhruva*, they also make *Dhruva * also to rotate. 





## 27
An example is given here. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 27:    
Tailapeedaa yathaa chakram bhramanto bhraamayanti vai |   
Tathaa bhramanti jyoteemshi vaata viddhaani sarvashah ||*** It is like the bullocks tied to a wheel for extraction of oil. When they rotate, the spindle also rotates, the wheel also rotates. This is how *Dhruva * is also made to rotate. 





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 28:  ***Page **192** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Alaata chakravat yaanti vaata chakreritaani tu |   
Yasmaat jyoteemshi vahati pravahah tena sa smrutah ||*** A stick having fire at one end, when rotating very fast, we see a circle of fire there. This is like that. In the same way, the stars are all seen. Because the air carries all these luminary bodies, which are rotating, it is called as *pravaha*. 





## 29
Now, *Paraasharar * is going to tell about the *Shimshumaara*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 29:    
Shimshumaarah tu yah proktah sa dhruvo yatra tishthati |   
Sannivesham cha tasya api shrunushva munisattama || ***Earlier, it was told about the *Shimshumaara chakra*, like the aquatic animal, the porpoise. The tail part of it is where *Dhruva * is located. At the heart of *Shimshumaara, Sriman Naaraayana * is located. How they are all arranged is going to be told, O *Maitreyar*, do listen to me. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shimshumaara iti | Yah proktah \* Taaraamayam bhagavatah iti atra, \* Tasya   
pucche dhruvah sthitah iti lakshanasya uktam, tasya sannivesham shrunu |*** 





## 30
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 30:    
Yat ahnaa kurute paapam tam drushtvaa nishi muchyate |   
Yaavatyah cha eva taaraah taah shimshumaara aashritaa divi |   
Taavanti eva tu varshaani jeevanti abhyadhikaani cha ||*** Whatever sins are committed during the day, in the night, if we look at the *Shimshumaara chakra*, we get rid of all those sins. As many stars are supported in the *Shimshumaara chakra * in the sky, the person who sees everyday the *Shimshumaara **chakra*, he lives for as many years as there are the number of stars in that, and even more. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yat ahnaa iti | Yat ahneti nitya drashtavyataa uktih |*** One has to see the *Shimshumaara chakra * everyday, is being told. 





## 31
Now, it is told by giving analogy of the various parts of the human body. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 31:    
Uttaanapaadah tasya adho vijnyeyo hi uttaro hanuh |   
Yajnyo adharah cha vijnyeyo dharmo moordhaanam aashritah ||*** *Dhruva * is located in the upper jaw. *Yajnya * is located in the lower jaw position. *Dharma * is located in the forehead portion. 





## 32
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 32:    
Hrudi naaraayanah cha aaste ashvinou poorva paadayoh |   
Varunah cha aryamaa cha eva paschime tasya sakthini ||*** Page **193** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **In the heart location, *Naaraayana * is present. In the front feet, *Ashvini devataas * are present. *Varuna * and *Aryamaa * are in the back part of the thigh. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Hrudi iti | Sakthinee ooroo |*** 





## 33
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 33:    
Shishnah samvatsarah tasya mitra upaanam samaashritah || ****Samvatsara * is located in the regenerative part, and *Mitra * is located at the back, rectal part. 





## 34
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 34:    
Pucche agnih cha mahendrah cha kaashyapo atha tatho dhruvah |   
Taarakaa shimshumaarasya na astameti chatushtayam ||*** In the tail part, *Agni, Mahendra, Kaashyapa * and *Dhruva * are located. These four stars will never set. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Puccha iti | Agni aadi devataa roopam taaraa chatushkam pucchastham   
dhruvavat nityam drushyate, na tu shimshumaara gaatra antargata   
arkshavadastameti dhruvasahayaayitvaat |*** These four stars, *Agni, Mahendra, Kaashyapa, Dhruva*, can be seen everyday. The other part of the *Shimshumaara chakra*, whatever stars are there, they are not seen everyday. 





## 35
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 35:    
Iti esha sannivesho yah pruthivyaa jyotishaam tathaa |   
Dveepaanaam udadheenaam cha parvataanaam cha keertitah ||*** Thus, I have told you all the arrangements and disposition of the earth, stars, islands, oceans, mountains. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ityesha iti | Uktasya bhuvanakoshasya anuktam bhagavat aatmakatvam   
vaktum anuvaadah ityesha iti | ***This is said in order to say whatever has not been told so far. That everything is *Bhagavat aatmaka*, which is the actual *tattva*. 





## 36
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 36:    
Varshaanaam cha nadeenaam cha ye cha teshu vasanti vai |   
Teshaam svaroopam aakhyaatam sankshepah shrooyataam punah ||*** And also the various lands, demarcated by the *Varshaadris*, the various rivers, whose who live there, everything I have told you. Now, a very important explanation is going to start by *Paraasharar*. Again, listen to that briefly, I am going Page **194** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **to tell you what was not told earlier. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Varshaanaam cha iti | Atha chit achit mishre jagati chit amshah sva samvedya   
svaroopa bhedo jnyana ekaakaarah avinaashitvena asti shabda vaachyah, achit   
amshah tu chit amsha karma nimitta parinaama bhedo vinaashee iti naasti   
shabda vaachyah | Ubhayam api parabrahma bhoota vaasudeva shareeratayaa   
tadaatmakam iti etat roopam sankshepena uchyate iti aaha - sankshepah   
shrooyataam iti | ***What is that *Paraasharar * is intending to convey here? In this world, which is mixed with sentient and non-sentient, one who knows himself without any *jnyaana * or *pramaana*, having *jnyaana * only as the *svaroopa*, his essential nature is of consciousness, and he is indestructible, and that is why he is called as *Asti*; and the non-sentient part of the world, and it attains many forms due to the modifications it undergoes, because of the *karmaas * of the sentients, in order to give them the experience of the fruits of the *karmaas, \(deha, insriyaas, vishayaas*, are all given\), which are all modifications of *prakruti * only, it undergoes destruction \(there is no *svaroopa naasha*, but there is *svaroopa parinaama*\), it is called by the word *Naasti*. Both these are *shareera * for *Vaasudeva*, who is *Parabrahma*; both these have *Parabrahma, Vaasudeva * as their *aatma*. This is going to be told briefly. 



*Svasmai bhaasamaanastvam * is told. 



This world has two parts - sentient and non-sentient. 



*Shareera * is because of the three relationships - *Yasya chetanasya yat **dravyam, sarvaatmanaa svaarthe niyantum dhaarayitum cha yat **shakyam* that *sheshataika svaroopam cha tat tasya shareeram, itarah shareeri*. This is the *lakshana * told by *Sri Bhaashyakaarar * in *Sri Bhaashya * and *Vedaarthasangraha. **Shareera * is a *dravya*, under the control of the *shareeri*, that which is controlled, supported and meant for the purpose of the *shareeri*. One who controls, supports and is the Master, is the *shareeri*. This is the relationship. Everything is having Him as the self, this way, everything is His *shareera*. He is *aatma * for everything. 





## 37
This is an extremely important *shloka*, where the principle which is to be understood for all the remaining *shlokaas * is explained. What we have to understand first is explained. The next ten *shlokaas * are commented by *Bhaashyakaarar * in *Sri Bhaashya*. The commentary which we see here in *Sri Engal Aalwaan's vyaakhyaana*, is exactly same as what is found in *Sri Bhaashya*, 99 percent same. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 37:    
Yat ambu vaishnavah kaayah tato vipra vasundharaa |   
Padmaakaaraa samudbhootaa parvata abdhi aadi samyutaa ||*** Water, is *shareera * of Vishnu, and because of water only, earth in the form of lotus, is Page **195** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **born. It has the mountains, oceans, etc. 



This is told in the *Shrutis*, for creation, *Aatmanah aakaashah sambhootah, aakaashaat **vaayuh, vaayoragnih, angeraapah, apbhyah pruthivee, pruthivyaa oshadhayah*. From waters, *pruthivi * is created, and it has got plants, rivers, etc. Water itself is the *shareera * of *Vishnu*. Earth which has come from water is also in the same way. 



*Saamaanaadhikaranya * is a very important concept in *Vedaanta. Bhinna pravrutti **nimittaanaam shabdaanaam ekasmin arthe vruttih saamaanaadhikaranyam*. This is told by the grammarian *KaiyaTa*. We agree with this definition and *Bhaashyakaarar * explains everything according to this. *Saamaanaadhikaranya * means words which are in the same *vibhakti*, indicate different *visheshana*, which denote different aspects of the same qualified object. A single object can be qualified by multiple attributes, which are not opposed to each other. *Visheshanaanaam vyaavartakatvaat*, is a commonly understood thing. Attributes actually eliminate others. If we say "He is a tall boy", it is understood that "He is not a short boy". The attribute Tall eliminates Short. If something is white, it eliminates black, red, blue, etc. Attributes are always of the nature of eliminating others. Other views, *pakshaas * say that multiple *visheshanaas*, attributes, cannot qualify the same object because they are all of the nature of elimination; so they have to qualify different objects is what they say, in *Satyam jnyaanam anantam brahma*; so they give a secondary meaning for all those words. But *Bhaashyakaarar * says that if they are not opposed to each other, there is nothing wrong in multiple attributes qualifying the same object. This is the meaning of *Saamaanaadhikaranya*. *Adhikarana * is the *visheshya*, and the *padaas * are all *visheshanaas*. Different *visheshanaas * which are not contradicting each other can qualify the same *visheshya. Ekasmin arthe vruttih*. They all qualify the same *artha*, object. Because everything is *shareera * of Vishnu, words which denote the *shareera*, can also denote the *shareeri. Shareera vaachaka shabda * also denotes the *shareeri*. This is why *saamaanaadhikaranya * is possible. 



Even for humans, when we say *Devadatta, Yajnyadatta*, it is not just the body outside which we are addressing, but also the *jeevaatman * who is inside, who is *visheshya. **Jeevaatman * who is qualified by the body is addressed as *Devadatta*. But, it is a *manushya shareera*, so *Devadatta * as a man addresses the *manushya jaati*, but also denotes the *shareeri * who is qualified by the *shareera*. This is why *Devadatta * can be used for either the *chetana * or the body. When we say *Devadattah sama parimaanah **yuvaa*, they are all different attributes not contradicting each other; one tells about his age, one tells about his being handsome, one tells about his colour. These are all different aspects qualifying the same object. This is how any word can be told in coordination with Vishnu because everything is His *shareera * only. This is what *Sri **Paraasharar * is telling; first he tells about everything is His *shareera*, then he tells in coordination that everything is *Vishnu * only. Page **196** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **



How can we say *saamaanaadhikaranya * with *Vishnu * for everything? This is because of the *shareera shareeri bhaava*. This is the most important thing we have to understand. First, *Paraasharar * made it clear that everything is *shareera * to *Vishnu*. And then, because of the *shareera aatma bhaava*, everything can be said to be in coordination with Vishnu in *Saamaanaadhikaranya*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yat iti | Tatra yat ambu iti anena shlokena ambunah vishnoh kaayatvena tat   
parinaama bhootam brahmaandam api tasya kaayah, tasya cha vishnuh aatmaa   
iti, sakala shruti gata taadaatmya upadesha upabrahmana roopasya \*   
Jyoteemshi ityaadinaa vakshyamaanasya saamaanaadhikaranasya shareera   
aatma bhaava eva nibandhanam iti aaha | Tatah ambunah |*** In the next *shlokaas * we see *Jyoteemshi Vishnuh*, everything is told in coordination with *Vishnu*. All the world are *Vishnu * only, all the forests are *Vishnu * only, all the mountains and directions are *Vishnu*, stars are *Vishnu*, rivers and oceans are *Vishnu*, everything is told as *Vishnu*. All are told in coordination, how is this to be understood? This is called *saamaanaadhikaranya*. By telling that water is *shareera * of *Vishnu*, that which is created is an effect of water, the *brahmaanda, vasundharaa, padmaakaaraa*, the lotus shaped *Brahmaanda*, which contains mountains, oceans, etc. is also an effect of that only, as it also is *shareera * of *Vishnu*. 



Because waters are *Vishnu's shareera*, the effect of that, the modifications of water, *Brahmaanda * is also *Vishnu's shareera. Vishnu * is *aatmaa * for that also, this is told in all the *shrutis*, and also here. *Vishnu Puraana * is *upabrahmana, vishadeekarana, Shruti vaakyaas * are explained in detail here. *Taadaatmya * is unity, that everything is one only - *Sarvam khalvidam **brahma*, that everything is *Brahman*. This *upadesha * is explained here in detail. The *taadaatmya * which is told in the *Shrutis*, these *shlokaas * are *upabrahmana * for that. These are the explanation for how we have to understand that. The *saamaanaadhikaranya*, concomitant coordination which will be told further, is to be understood. How can that happen, means that because of *shareera aatma **bhaava, saamaanaadhikaranya * is perfectly valid. This explains the *shrutis * which tell the *taadaatmya*. 



*Paraasharar * gives a few examples, and after that concludes with a generic statement - ' *yadasti yat naasti cha*'. 





## 38
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 38:    
Jyoteemshi vishnuh bhuvanaani vishnuh vanaani vishnuh girayo dishascha |   
Nadyah samudraah cha sa eva sarvam yat asti yat naasti cha vipravarya ||*** Page **197** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **All the luminary bodies are *Vishnu * only, the worlds are all *Vishnu*, forests are all *Vishnu*, the mountains, directions, rivers, oceans, everything is *Vishnu * only. Whatever is denoted by *asti shabda*, whatever is denoted by *naasti shabda*, all are Him only. 



There is nothing other than *asti * or *naasti*, everything is either *chetana * or *achetana*. There are only three realities, *chit, achit * and *Eeshvara*. Apart from *Eeshvara*, there are only two other realities - *chit * and *achit*. He first tells about all things we see around, various luminary bodies, stars, the worlds, forests, mountains, directions, rivers, oceans. *Paraasharar * says that they are all *Vishnu * only, *shareera * of Vishnu. This is told in coordination, *Saamaanaadhikaranya*. After mentioning a few things, anything that can be denoted as *asti shabda vaachya*, and anything which is *naasti shabda vaachya*, everything is *Vishnu * only. What are these *asti * and *naasti*, and why are they called so, is explained in the next few *shlokaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***** *****Tat etat taadaatmyam saamaanaadhikaranyena vyapadishati jyoteemshi iti |   
Atra asti aatmakam naasti aatmakam cha jagat antargatam vastu vishnoh   
kaayatayaa vishnu aatmakam iti uktam |*** The *taadaatmya*, unity, is explained by the words *jyoteemshi*, etc. *Shareera vaachi **shabdaas * are going up to *shareeri, shareeri paryanta*. Because of *shareera shareeri **bhaava*, this *saamaanaadhikaranya * is to be understood. Whatever is in this world, denoted by *asti * and *naasti; asti * is told as *asti * because it is eternal, does not undergo change in its essential nature. All three realities are *nitya * only. Even *prakruti * is *nitya * in its *avyakta avasthaa*. But, *prakruti * is *satata **parinaami*, keeps on undergoing change all the time. This is why it is called as *naasti*. When we have a pot, for example, when the pot is broken, it is destroyed, it becomes *kapaala*, and when that gets broken, it becomes powder. When each *avasthaa * goes to another *avasthaa*, it is *naasti, naasti, naasti*, it attains newer and newer states. Whereas *chetana * is always *jnyaana eka aakaara*, therefore it is said to be *asti shabda vaachya, svaroopa parinaama * is not there, change happens only in *svabhaava*. 





## 39
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 39:    
Jnyaana svaroopa bhagavaan yato asou ashesha moortih na tu vastu bhootah |   
Tato hi shailaabdhi dhara aadi bhedaan jaaneehi vijnyaana vijhrumbitaani ||*** *Bhagavaan * is *jnyaana svaroopa*, because He is only present in all forms. What we see as *deva, manushya, shaila*, etc. are not that. Know all these things as only the expressions of the *jnyaana*, due to the karma, with the *anusandhaana * that happens. It is not the nature of *aatman*, which is called by the *asti shabda*. Page **198** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **Here, the *srushti prakarana * which was also told earlier, is that during *pralaya*, the entire world consisting of the sentients and non-sentients, *chetana * and *achetana*, the entire thing is merged into *Bhagavaan*, united into *Bhagavaan * as one, as though there are no two entities. This is told in the *Shrutis*. During *Srushti*, what *Paramaatman * does is that those which are there during *pralaya *\(in very subtle form, without any name and form differentiation\), *Paramaatman * does *sankalpa*, and by mere willing, brings all these into their gross state, *sthoola avasthaa*, where the name and form differentiation is seen. *Sookshma chit achit vishishta **Paramaatman * becomes *sthoola chit achit vishishta Paramaatman*. In both the causal state and state of effect, these are all *visheshana * to Him; they are all like His attributes. They are all inseparably associated with Him. 



Why is it so? He is the supporter of everything, He is controller of everything, and He is also the Inner Self. Nothing can exist without Him. They are always associated with Him, whether in the subtle or gross state, this entire world consisting of sentients and non sentients is inseparably associated with *Paramaatman*. But, they are existing as *shareera * of *Paramaatman. Paramaatman's svaroopa * and *svabhaava * are told in thousands of places in the *Shrutis*, that *Paramaatman's svaroopa * is *Satyam, **Jnyaanam, Anantam*; that He is all pervading, omniscient, omnipotent, immutable. His *svabhaava * is such that He is storehouse of all auspicious qualities, without any blemish, it is told as *nirgunah, niranjanah, apahata paapmaa, vijarah, vimrutyuh, **vishokah, vijighatsah, apipaasah, satya kaamah, satya sankalpah*. He is without any defect in any state, at any time, and is storehouse of all auspicious qualities. 



Whereas *chetana * and *achetana * have got certain defects. Achetana undergoes change all the time in its essential nature itself, so, it is said to be *naasti shabda vaachya*. Whatever was a lump of mud becomes a pot; when the pot is broken, we say that the pot is gone, and that it is only the pieces, *kapaala*; from that it becomes powder. So, *achetana * is all the time changing. *Achetanaa paraarthaa cha nityaa satata **vikriyaa. Trigunaa karmanaamshe prakrute roopam uchyate | Prakruti * which is *achetana*, undergoing change all the time, in its very essential nature itself. But it is told that it is also *nitya*. How is this possible? If it is changing all the time, how can it be said to be *nitya*, eternal? That is always remaining in one particular state, of *moola prakruti, avyakta, pradhaana*. It is existing in this state all the time, *nitya*, eternal. This undergoes changes and modifies into *mahat, ahamkaara, pancha **bhootaas * and the *bhoutika padaarthaas * we see here. All the time, it is the *shareera * of *Paramaatman*. Changes happen in the *shareera*, the *svaroopa **parinaama * of *prakruti * which is happening does not affect *Paramaatman*, as it is happening in His *shareera*, and does not affect His nature in any way. 



In the same way, *jeevaatmans * undergo contraction and expansion in their *dharma **bhoota jnyaana*, attributive knowledge. They are *avikaari * in *svaroopa*, the essential nature does not undergo any change any time. That is also *apahata paapma, vijarah, *Page **199** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***vimrutyuh, vishokah, vijighatsah, apipaasah, satya kaamah, satya sankalpah*. In essential nature, he is without any defect, pure. Whereas in his attributive nature, he has contraction and expansion because of the dharma. What is this contraction and expansion; contraction means that he forgets the true reality of his nature. He forgets that he is *sheshabhoota * to *Paramaatman*, he forgets that he is pure in reality. He thinks that he is the body he has taken due to the *karma * to experience these fruits. He takes on bodies of *deva, manushya*, etc. and he thinks that he himself is *deva*. Whereas he is not. He suffers in agonies, sorrows, has happiness, etc. whereas in reality, these are all not connected to his essential nature. This is what happens to *jeevaatman*. He is always in the same way, without any change, He is eternally present like that. There is no change in his essential nature, this is why he is called as *nitya*. This is *asti shabda vaachya*. But, here also, *jeevaatmans * are having *Paramaatman * as the inner controller. They are also his *shareera*. There is change in the attributive nature of the *jeevaatman*, who is *shareera * of *Paramaatman*. This does not affect *Paramaatman * in any way. 



In His essential and attributive nature, *Paramaatman * is untouched by any of these changes. 



This is what is explained in these *shlokaas * as *asti * and *naasti*. What we see in this world - rivers, mountains, oceans - all of them have *Paramaatman * as the *aatman * or inner self. Words which denote the body also denote the inner self. In our case, we have a body, and there is an individual self inside. The name given the body addresses the individual self also; it is not merely the body. In the same way, the same name also addresses the *Paramaatman * who is Inner Self. So, everything can be said to be *Paramaatman * only. This is told here as *jnyaana svaroopah bhagavaan yatah. **Bhagavaan * is *jnyaana svaroopa*. 



*Ashesha moortih asou *- all these forms are Him only. Mountain is also *Bhagavaan * only. He is *jnyaana svaroopa*. He Himself is not the mountain; mountain is His *shareera, **prakruti * which has modified into the form of mountain, which is *shareera * to *Paramaatman*, inseparably associated with *Paramaatman*, He being the Inner Self is always there. He can also be said to be the mountain in that way. He Himself is not the mountain, but is *antaryaami * of the mountain. Because it is inseparably associated with Him all the time, He can also be called as mountain. 



It is only the outer expression of *Paramaatman's * Self that all these - *shaila, abdhi, **dharaa *- the multifarious , multitude of things we see here, they are all modifications in the body of the *Paramaatman*. This is said as *vijnyaana vijhrumbhitaani*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Idam astyaatmakam, idam naastyaatmakam, \(iti atra\) asya cha   
naastyaatmakatve hetuh ayam iti aaha - jnyaana svaroopa iti | Ayam arthah - ***Page **200** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****ashesha kshetrajnya aatmanaa avasthitasya bhagavato jnyaanam eva   
svaabhaavikam roopam na deva manushyaadi vastu roopam | Yata evam ata eva   
achit roopa deva manushya shaila abdhi dharaa aadayah tat vijnyaana   
vijhrumbhitaah tasya jnyaana eka aakaarasya sato devaadi aakaarena sva   
aatma vaividhya anusandhaana moolaah, deva aadi aakaara anusandhana moola   
karma \(moolaah\) kalpitaah iti arthah | Yatah cha achit vastu kshetrajnya karma   
anuguna parinaama aaspadam tatah tat naasti shabda abhidheyam, itarat asti   
shabda abhidheyam iti arthaat uktam bhavati |*** This is going to be explained, what is *astyaatmaka*, and what is *naastyaatmaka. **Kshetrajnyaas * are *jeevaatmans * with *deha*. Cf Chapter 13 of *Bhagavad **Geetha. Bhagavaan * is only present as all the *kshetrajnyaas*. The nature of *Bhagavaan * is actually *jnyaana roopa*; though He is present in all these forms, He is present as *shareeri*, and the changes happen only in the *shareera. Shareeri * is eternal, *eka roopa*, and there is no change in *Bhagavaan's svaroopa, svabhaava*. What we see as *deva, manushya*, etc., are not the nature of *Bhagavaan*. He is only present as everything. His *svaabhaavika roopa * is *jnyaana * only, it is not *deva * and *manushya*. Because it is so, that which is seen in *achit roopa *\(non sentient form\) as *deva, **manushya, shaila *\(mountains\), *dharaa *\(earth\), they are all the expressions of the *aatman* due to wrong understanding, what we see outward; inside the *vijnyaana * is *eka roopa*, unchanged. The *chetanaas * also think that 'I am only *deva*', 'I am only *manushya*', etc., they think that everything is Him, the *jnyaana eka **aakaara * is *svaabhaavika roopa*, these are all just the understanding. Because of the *karma*, the *chetana * thinks that he only is *manushya*, but he is not *manushya*, he is *jnyaana svaroopa * inside; he does not understand this because of the *karma*. The *achit vastu*, non-sentient is always getting modified, undergoes change in the *svaroopa * itself, according to the *karmaas * of the *kshetrajnyaas*, that is why it is called by the word *naasti*. The other *jnyaana svaroopa * is told as *asti shabda*. What is said as *asti-aatmaka * and *naasti-aatmaka - asti * is that which exists all the time, and *naasti * is that which is not there or destroyed - and what is the reason why they are told like that? This is told in this *shloka*. 



*Bhagavaan * is only present as all the *kshetrajnya. Kshetrajnyas * are embodied souls, *jeevaatman * having the body. *Kshetra * is the body, and *kshetrajnya * is *jeevaatman. Paramaatman * is present as Inner Self. He is only present as all. The *kshetra * is not the natural form of *Paramaatman*, as that is undergoing change all the time, and *Bhagavaan * does not undergo change like that. Because of that, these things - mountain, ocean - all are the outer expression of His *vijnyaana*, His *jnyaana * only told as His *sankalpa*. Because of His *sankalpa*, He said - *Bahusyaam prajaayeya*; and everything became gross like this. This is said to be *vijnyaana vijhrumbitaani*. 



He did *sankalpa*, that Let Me become many; and He became many. Because of this Page **201** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **reason, He is seen in all these forms. He brought this subtle state to the gross state like this. Why should He do like this? He creates all these into the gross state, He wants to give the *jeevaatmans * the experiences of the fruits of their *karma*. In order to do that, He Himself expresses in all these forms, so that *jeevaatmans* can get into all these, and can experience the results of their *karma*. And that they can also do the *anusthaana * of *upaaya*, means to emancipation, and get rid of *samsaara*. He gives them an opportunity to experience the fruits of the actions they have done, *karmaas*; and based on the *karmaas * of each individual, different experiences are there; those experiences happen in various kinds of bodies, and all these bodies are created because of that. This is told as *kalpita, kalpanaa * means *srushti*; this is also told in one *Brahma Sutra, Kalpanopadeshaat cha. Kalpanaa * is *sooryaa chandramasou dhaataa **yathaa poorvam akalpayat. Kalpanam srushtih * is explained by *Bhaashyakaarar*. 



Generally, when we translate the word *kalpita*, we say "imagined". He did *sankalpa*; they are all true. Nothing is false in our *siddhaanta*; everything is true; it is not an illusion. Why is it true? It is to give a place for experience of the *karmaas*, fruits of the *karmaas*, for the *jeevaatman. Paramaatman * Himself has to support everything, He is supporting all the time; He brings about this change in the *shareera*, and then He makes *jeevaatmans * get into the various bodies, makes them experience the results of the karma, creation is done because of that. But, by His nature, He Himself is not the mountain, He is unaffected by any of the defects of the *shareera, **chetana * or *achetana*. He remains in the same form all the time. 



The *achit vastu*, which is non-sentient, is getting modified according to the *karmaas * of the *kshetrajnya*. So, it is told as the *naasti shabda*. It does not remain the same all the time, keeps on changing. When a person dies, that person is gone, he is *naasti*. Whereas he enters another body. The body merges into the five elements, *pancha bhootaas*. And a new body is created, and is given to the *jeevaatman. Achetana * is all the time undergoing change, and does not remain in the same state always. Because of this, it is said to be *naasti shabda vaachya*. 



*Jeevaatmans * are called by *asti shabda*, because the same *jeevaatman * enters into another body. There is only contraction in his *dharma bhoota jnyaana*, but he remains constant without any change. 





## 40
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 40:    
Yadaa tu shuddham nijaroopi sarvam karmakshaye jnyaanam apaasta dosham |   
Tadaa hi sankalpataroh phalaani bhavanti no vastushu vastu bhedaah ||*** When all the *karmaas * end, he gets rid of all the *doshaas*, defects, because of which his *dharma bhoota jnyaana * has contracted; therefore he thinks that he himself is *deva, manushya, krimi, keeta*. When the *karma kshaya * happens, all the *dosha * goes. Page **202** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **All the fruits in the tree of *sankalpa*, when they end, this kind of experience will not exist any more, is the meaning of this *shloka*. 



When he is in the body of *deva, manushya*, etc., he will act according to that, again accumulate *karma*, and fruits, good or bad, and in order to experience, he will get another body. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tat etat eva vivrunoti yadaa tu shuddham iti | Yadaa etat jnyaana ekaakaaram   
aatmavastu devaadi aakaarena sva aatmani vaividhya anusandhaana moola   
sarva karma kshayaat nirdosham parishuddham nija roopi bhavati, tadaa   
devaadi aakaarena ekeekrutya aatma kalpanaa moola karma phala bhootah tat   
bhoga arthaa vastushu vastu bhedaa na bhavanti - ye devaadishu vastushu   
aatmatayaa abhimateshu bhogya bhootaa deva manushya shaila abdhi dharaa   
aadi vastu bhedaah te moola bhoota karmasu vinashteshu na bhavanti iti, achit   
vastunah kadaachitka avasthaa vishesha yogitayaa naasti shabda   
abhidheyatvam itarasya sarvadaa nija siddha jnyaana ekaroopatvena asti   
shabda abhidheyatvam iti arthah |*** When he is real *jnyaana eka aakaara, shuddha*. The most important attribute of *aatman * is that he is *jnyaana eka aakaara*. That is why he is addressed at many places as *jnyaana * itself, because it is the *saara bhoota guna * of *jeevaatman*. His *nija **roopa * is that only, but because of karma, it is covered because of the *avidyaa*. When he gets rid of that, which is the cause of the *anusandhaana * that 'I am different', when all the defects are completely gone, he becomes pure and his original state, the various objects of experience which are here, that will not be there anymore with the karma completely gone. In order to experience the karma only, all these are there, we think that 'We are eating food', in the real state, all these things are not there, when he attains his real state without any *karma*. Because of the *karma*, he thinks of himself as *deva, manushya*, etc., he thinks of them to be enjoyable, this is addressed by the word *naasti. Chetana * is in its original state, which is *jnyaanaika roopa, **shuddha*, denoted by the *asti shabda*. 



We are studying *Amsha * 2, Chapter 12, where *Paraasharar * is teaching very important aspects. After having taught about the *bhuvanaas*, the various worlds, *Paraasharar * is teaching a very important concept that everything is controlled by *Paramaatman*, *Sri **Mahaavishnu*, and that He is *antaryaami * of everything. He is existing as everything. All these aspects, *Paraasharar * is teaching here. 



*Jeevaatman * is also *jnyaana eka aakaara. Jeevaatman * who is also *jnyaana eka **aakaara*, being pure and untainted even in the bound state in his essential nature, but his attributive nature only changes. When he is in a body of a *deva*, he identifies himself with the *deva*, he thinks he himself is the body. But, he is not *deva*, he is actually a *jnyaana svaroopa*. He forgets this because of the contraction in attributive Page **203** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **knowledge. He identifies himself with all these *achetana padaarthaas*. Whereas he is *chetana, jnyaana avaroopi*, he forgets that. This happens because of the *karma * that he has accumulated. He has to experience the results of that *karma*. When he surrenders unto the Lord, does *bhakti yoga*, gets rid of that *karma*, all these defects vanish. At that time, he is without any defect, and goes into his natural state, *nija **roopi*. Identifying himself with the *deva * and other forms, he thinks of himself in those forms - these forms are a result of the *karmaas * of the *jeevaatmans*, and also the enjoyable things which are there - the sense objects, *bhoga arthaah*. When his *karmaas * all end, then he will not experience these forms and sense objects any more, he will never think of himself as *deva, manushya*, etc. All these things we see in this world, as most enjoyable, it will not be like that, because he will be in his true original state where his *dharma bhoota jnyaana * will be in proper original state. He will never be subjected to these limited experiences which happen here. When he was in a body like *deva * and others, when he thought of himself as the body, the objects of experience and enjoyment, which are nothing but *deva, manushya, shaila, **abdhi, dharaa*, the various objects we see here, when the *karmaas * are destroyed, these kinds of experiences will not be there any more. The *achit vastu*, which is insentient, matter, is always taking some state or the other, undergoing change, is called by the *naasti shabda. Jeevaatmans* are all the time in their essential nature, *jnyaana eka roopa*, and because of that, they are called by the *asti shabda*. 





## 41
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 41:    
Vastu asti kim kutrachit aadi madhya paryanta heenam \(cha sadaa eka\)   
satataika roopam |   
Yat cha anyathaatvam dvija yaati bhooyo na tat tathaa tatra huto hi tattvam   
||*** The first line of this *shloka * is telling about *jeevaatman*, and the second line is telling about *achetana*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Prati kshanam anyathaa bhootatayaa kaadaachitka avasthaa yoginah chit   
vastunah naasti shabda abhidheyatvam eva iti aaha - vaastu asti iti | Asti   
shabda abhidheyo hi aadi madhya paryanta heenah satata eka roopah   
padaarthah, tasya kadaachit api naasti buddhi anarhatvaat | Achit vastu kinchit   
kvachit api tathaa bhootam na drushtacharam | Tatah kim iti atra aaha - yat   
cha anyathaatvam iti | Yat vastu prati kshanam anyathaatvam yaati tat   
uttarottara avasthaa praaptyaa poorva poorva avasthaam jahaati iti tasya   
poorva avasthasya uttara avasthaayaam na prati sandhaanam asti, atah   
sarvadaa tasya naasti shabda abhidheyatvam eva |*** The *achetana * which is all the time undergoing change in its essential nature itself, is always said to be by the *naasti shabda * only. It is called *naasti * as it never exists in the same state, keeps on modifying from one state to another state. We have ice, when heated it becomes water, then it becomes steam, water is gone. This is told Page **204** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **as *naasti*. It always exists in some other state, there is no complete destruction in its essential nature, because in some state, it is eternal. That which is called as *asti, **jeevaatman*, do not have a beginning or middle or end, as they exist in the same state all the time. The essential nature of *jeevaatman * is identical for ever, all the time, it is always *eka roopa padaartha*; it is never told as *naasti*. Whereas the inert matter is never seen like that, not in the same state all the time. Because of this, what happens? That which is attaining different states all the time, which is undergoing changes, is it told at any time as *asti*? No. it is never told like that, it is always told as *naasti * only. 



Have you seen any matter, material which can be told as not having beginning or middle or end? No, we can never see like that because they are always created, destroyed, they go to different states, they keep on changing. We can never say that they are existing forever in one state, with respect to the *achetanaas*, non-sentient matter. 





## 42
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 42:    
Mahee ghatatvam ghatatah kapaalikaa kapaalikaa choorna rajah tato anuh |   
Janaih sva karmastimita aatma nishchayaih aalakshyate broohi kim atra vastu   
|| ***Mud which becomes a pot, pot when broken becomes *kapaala, kapaalikaa * when broken becomes powder, that becomes very subtle dust, then it becomes *anu * or atomic. It changes state like this. *Kapaala * is not called as *ghata; ghata * gets destroyed. *Kapaala * gets destroyed, and then it becomes *choorna. Choorna * is destroyed and becomes *rajas. Rajas * gets destroyed and goes into *anu * state. People who have lost the knowledge of their real self, because of their own *karmaas * done - how can they say that it is *asti shabda*? They will not say like that. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tathaa hi upalabhyata iti aaha - mahee ghatatvam iti | Choornam sookshmam,   
rajah sookshmataram, anuh sookshmatamah, sva karmanaa dev amanushyaadi   
bhaavena stimita aatma nishchayaih sva bhogya bhootam achit vastu prati   
kshanam anyathaa bhootam aalakshyate anubhooyate | Evam sati kimapi achit   
vastu asti shabdam arham aadi madhya paryanta heenam satata eka roopam   
aalakshitam asti kim ? Na hi asti iti abhipraayah |*** The *naasti shabda*, is what we see in this world. Each one is more subtle than the previous state. Because of their *karma*, they are identifying themselves as *deva, **manushya*; so the nature of understanding their own self is obstructed. When they are finding all this matter as enjoyable, objects of enjoyment, they also see that the *achit vastu * is changing all the time; even though they do not have an understanding of the nature of the self; even such people do not see it as *asti shabda **vaachya*. Even with people who have got limited knowledge of their self, they also see that *achetana * is changing all the time; so it can never be told by the *asti shabda*. Page **205** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **There is no *achetana padaartha * which is changing all the time. 





## 43
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 43:    
Tasmaat na vijnyaanam rute asti kinchit kvachit kadaachit dvija vastu jaatam |   
Vijnyaanam ekam nija karma bheda vibhinna chittaih bahudhaa abhyupetam ||*** Leaving out the *vijnyaana*, there is nothing which is *asti shabda vaachya. Aatma **vastu * is only thought of or identified with all these, but in reality it is not because of the nature of *aatman*, but because of the nature of *achit*, with which it is associated, due to the *karma*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yasmaat evam tasmaat jnyaana svaroopa aatma vyatiriktam achit vastu   
kadaachit kvachit kevala asti shabda vaachyam na bhavati iti aaha tasmaat na   
vijnyaanam iti | Aatmaa to sarvadaa jnyaana eka aakaaratayaa devaadi bheda   
pratyaneeka svaroopo api devaadi shareera pravesha hetu bhoota sva kruta   
vividha karma moola devaadi bheda bhinna aatma buddhibhih tena tena roopena   
bahudhaa anusamhita iti, tat bheda anusandhaanam na aatma svaroopa   
prayuktam iti aaha vijnyaanam ekam iti |*** Excepting the *aatma vastu*, which is *jnyaana eka aakaara*, there is nothing which is *asti shabda vaachya*. Leaving out the *jnyaana svaroopa aatma*, any *achetana*, material we see around here, at any point of time, and for whatever reason cannot be called by the *asti shabda*. Though he is of a nature very different from *deva * and others, the cause of taking on a body like *deva, manushya*, etc., are the various *karmaas * done himself; and the identifying with the body of *deva * and others, also happens due to the *karma * only. Always he is associated and going with those forms only, it is not because of the *aatma*, but because of the *achetana * which is *naasti shabda vaachya*. 



*Paraasharar * is telling that no *achetana*, for whatever reason, cannot be called as *asti **shabda. Jeevaatman * only is the thing which can be called as *asti shabda*. Even though *jeevaatman * is taking the form and identifying himself, it is due to the association with *prakruti * and not because of nature of *aatman*. It is not because of the nature of *aatman * because it is unchanging all the time, and all the time *jnyaana **eka aakaara*. 





## 44
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 44:    
Jnyaanam vishuddham vimalam \(cha nityam\) vishokam ashesha lobhaadi nirasta   
sangam |   
Ekam sadaikam paramah pareshah sa vaasudevo na yato anyat asti ||*** *Aatma svaroopa * is *jnyaana eka aakaara*, is *vishuddha*, *karma rahita*. It is not associated with all these, *shoka, moha, lobha*, grief, desire, greed, and all these experiences we see here. 



Page **206** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aatma svaroopam tu vishuddham karma rahitam, tata eva vimalam mala roopa   
prakruti sparsha rahitam, tatah cha tat prayukta shoka moha lobhaadi ashesha   
heya guna asangi, ekam upachaya apachaya anarhataa ekam, tata eva sadaa   
eka roopam; tat cha vaasudeva shareeram iti tadaatmakam, atadaatmakasya   
kasyachit api abhaavaat iti aaha jnyaanam vishuddham iti |*** *Aatma * does not have all these *karmaas * which we do here or see here. Because of association with *achetana prakruti*, we are thinking that we are doing all these, but in reality that is not true. *Aatma svaroopa * is always very pure, *karma rahita*. Even in the bound state, *jeevaatma svaroopa * is untainted by the *prakruti * because it remains pure *jnyaana svaroopa * only even in the *baddha dashaa*. Only in the *dharma bhoota **jnyaana*, attributive nature only, there is change. *Aatma svaroopa * is only one, does not undergo increase or decrease. It is always *eka roopa. Jeevaatma * is also *Vaasudeva * means that *jeevaatman * is *Vaasudeva's shareera*, having *Vaasudeva * as his *aatma*, or Inner Self. He is *Vaasudeva * because there is nothing other than Him, means that he is *shareera * of *Vaasudeva*, having *Paramaatman Vaasudeva * as his *aatma*; there is nothing which does not have *Vaasudeva * as his *aatma. **Abrahmaatmaka vastu * does not exist. All the *padaarthaas * are *Brahmaatmaka * only. 





## 45
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 45:    
Sadbhaava evam bhavato mayaa ukto jnyaanam yathaa satyam asatyam anyat |   
Etat tu yat samvyavahaara bhootam tatra api choktam bhuvanaashritam te ||*** *Sadbhaava * is only told to you by me. That everything is *Vaasudevaatmaka*, everything is *Brahmaatmaka*. There is nothing which does not have *Vaasudeva * as the *aatman*. Everything is His *shareera*, being inseparably associated with Him, supported by Him, controlled by Him. The *chetana amsha, jnyaana * does not undergo changes in its nature. The *achetana * is undergoing change every moment. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Chit amshah sadaa eka roopatayaa sarvadaa asti shabda vaachyah | Achit   
amshah tu kshana parinaamitvena sarvadaa naasha garbhamiti sarvadaa naasti   
shabda abhidheyah | Evam roopam chit achit aatmakam jagat vaasudeva   
shareeram tadaatmakam iti jagat yaathaatmyam samyak uktam iti aaha -   
sadbhaava evam iti | "Esho bhavatah" iti paathe aarshatvaat supo lopaabhaavah   
| Atra satyam asatyam iti yat asti yat naasti iti prakraantasya upasamhaarah |   
Etat jnyaana ekaakaaratayaa samam, ashabda gochara svaroopa bhedam eva   
achit mishram, bhuvanaashritam - deva manushya aadi roopena samyak   
vyavahaara arha bhedam yat vartate tatra hetuh karma eva iti uktam it iaaha -   
etat tu yat iti |*** In this embodied soul, there is a *chetana amsha*, and *achetana amsha. **Chetanaamsha * is always *eka roopa * in its essential nature. He always exists. When someone dies, *aatman * is always existing, and takes on a different body. When body dies, it disintegrates, and various elements merge into their causes. Page **207** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **Whereas *jeevaatman * remains in the same state, constant in his essential nature. *Achit amsha * is changing every moment, is called *naasti shabda*. This kind of world having *chetanaas * and *achetanaas*, is the *shareera * of *Vaasudeva*, supported by Him, controlled by Him, and He is master of all. Always it is having *Vaasudeva * as the self. That is the reality of this world, which I have explained you in detail. I have explained you in detail, very clearly, that this is the *yaathaatmya * of the *jagat*, reality, real nature of this world, which has *chetana * and *achetana*, everything having *Vaasudeva * as the *aatman*. Everything is the *shareera * for *Vaasudeva*. 



*Yat asti, yat naasti*, whatever was told in the beginning, is being concluded here with the words *satya * and *asatya. Asatya * does not mean it is false or illusion, but that it is *naasti shabda vaachya*. Because the *upadesha * here is started with the world being *Vaasudevaatmaka*, by telling as *asti, naasti*. Whatever is started in the *upakrama*, beginning, is concluded here in the *upasamhaara * with the words *satya * and *asatya*. The *aatma-aatma saamya*, which is told in *Geetha * also, that all the *aatmans * are similar because all are *jnyaana eka aakaara*. Every *aatma * in every body is *jnyaana eka aakaara*. They are multiple individuals but are all *jnyaana eka **aakaaraas*. There is no identity, but it is similarity. There are innumerable number of *jeevaatmans*, but all are *jnyaanaikaakaaraas. Ashabda * is *prakruti*, which is *achetana*, as told in the *Brahma Sutras*. The entire thing present in this world is mixture of *chetana * and *achetana*. In the *vyavahaara*, when we do our daily activities, as *deva, manushya - karma * only is the cause for all this. 





## 46
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 46:    
Yajnyah pashuh vahnih ashesha rutvik somah suraah svargamayah cha kaamah |   
Ityaadi karmaashrita maarga drushtam bhooraadi bhogaah cha phalaani teshaam   
||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tat eva vivrunoti - yajnyah pashuh iti | Karma aashrita maarga drushtam   
yajnya pancha aadi roopam karma eva aashrito maargah, tatra drushtam deva   
manushyaadi roopam teshaam karmanaam bhooh aadi bhogaah cha phalaani | ***That only is again explained here. We have to understand as *karma aashrita maarga*, and *drushtam *\(what is seen there\) - there are two. The path of the *karmaas - **Vedaas * tell about *yaagaas, yajnyaas*, etc. about *Jyotishtoma yaaga, Ashvamedha **Yaaga, Vaajapeya*, etc. - all of them consist of a *yajnya*, a *pashu *\(bali\), *vahni * or *agni, **ritviks \(hotru, udgaataa, adhvaryu*, etc.\), *soma rasa, devataas * associated with that who are worshipped through the *yajnyaas, svarga aadi phalaas*; these are all the *karmaas * there, the *karma maarga*. For those who are following the *karma **maarga*, there we see the *deva, manushya*, these kind of forms. We see that we are worshipping a *devataa*, only a *yajamaana * is performing the *yajnya*, these worlds where there are enjoyments - they are the fruits of that karma. 



Page **208** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **After telling about *asti * and *naasti shabda*, it tells about those following the *karma **maarga*. In this *karma maarga*, all of these are involved - *yajnya, pashu, ritwiks, **manushyaas, devataas * being worshipped; and that enjoyments in the worlds are the fruits, like *bhooloka, bhuvarloka*, etc. 





## 47
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 12, Shloka 47:    
Yat cha etat bhuvanagatam mayaa tavoktam sarvatra vrajati hi tatra   
karmavashyah |   
Jnyatvaa evam \(tat\) dhruvam achalam sadaa ekaroopam tat kuryaat vishati hi   
yena vaasudevam ||*** *Paraasharar * gives an ultimate message, *upadesha * here. A *karmavashya*, who is performing only the *karma maarga*, offering *havis * through various *yaagaas*, and enjoying the fruits of *svarga * and other things found in this world, and all the worlds explained to you, *bhoo, bhuva, suva, maha, jana, tapa, satya *\(in the previous chapters\), and all the *aavaranaas * beyond that, *ahamkaara, mahat*, up to *avyakta *- the *jeevaatmans * are always traversing here, because of experiencing the fruits of *karma*. They cannot escape from this *samsaara*. They undergo this cycle of births and deaths. One has to follow that path through which he will attain *Vaasudeva*, and will attain eternal bliss, *eka roopa*, which does not change, to escape from this cycle of births and deaths. He then enjoys communion with the Lord. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Jagat yaathaatymya jnyaana prayojanam moksha upaaye yatanam iti aaha - yat   
cha etat iti | Jnyaatvaa etat iti | Karma phalasya asthiratvam jnyaatvaa   
dhruvam iti aahadi vaasudeva visheshanam, tat - upaasanaadi |*** Why should one know about the various worlds, *lokaas, svargaas, narakaas*, the *aavaranaas*, which *Paraasharar * explained in such detail? One should know that whoever is here, in all these worlds - they are all ending some time or the other. If one starts associating with these, and identifying with these only, he will keep on coming into the cycle of births and deaths only. Having known all these, one should put effort to escape from *samsaara*. This is the purpose of all of this. One has to put effort to liberate from this *samsaara*. Knowing that the fruits of *karma * are all *asthira*, impermanent. *Vaasudeva * who is *sadaa achala, sadaa ekaroopa, dhruva *- whatever is to be performed in order to attain, gain communion with *Vaasudeva*, then he will attain that. He will go and attain *Paramaatman. Upaasanaa, prapatti*, etc. 



Having told about the 14 worlds, in such great detail, having told that everything is *Vaasudevaatmaka*, having told the *chetana amsha * is only *nitya * here, the *asti **shabda vaachya*, that the essential nature of *aatman * is untainted, that *achetana * is all the time undergoing changes, that they are all created by *Paramaatman * in order to experience the fruits of the *karma * that the *chetanaas * have done, that the *chetanaas * get into that and identify themselves, that even those not having a proper knowledge see that *achetana * is all the time changing, realizing that Page **209** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **the *karmaas * are giving fruits which are impermanent, short lived and meagre; one has to put effort towards the means required in order to attain unity with *Paramaatman*, who is eternal and ultimate bliss. This is the purpose of teaching all that. 



This concludes Chapter 12. Next, he is going to talk about *Bharata * who actually did this, the means to attain *Vaasudeva*. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Dviteeye Amshe Dvaadasho Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Sri Vishnu Chitteeye Dviteeye Amshe   
Dvaadasho Adhyaayah ||*** 



*** ***Page **210** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****   
|| Atha Trayodasho Adhyaayah ||   
Jadabharata Upaakhyaana*** 


