+++
title = "14"

+++


## 1

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 1:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Nishamya tasyeti vachah paramaarthasamanvitam |   
Prashrayaa avanato bhootvaa tamaaha nrupatih dvijam ||
_____
 *Sri Paraasharar* - The king understood that what he is talking is about *paramaartha*. Listening to that, with lot of obedience and bowing down to him, the king told the *Braahmana* thus. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Poorvaadhyaaye dehaadi vyatirikta aatmaa iti uktam | Anantarena adhyaayena   
sa eva \[nityatva ananyaarthatva anoupaadhikatva aadibhih\] parama   
purushaartha iti uchyate - nishamya iti | Paramaartha samanvitam   
paramaarthatayaa vakshyamaanena aatmanaa samanvitam tat vishayam |
_____
 In the previous chapter 13, it was told that *aatma* is different from body and *indriyaas*. In Chapter 14, which is following it, the same *aatman* is now said to be *parama purushaartha*, because he is *nitya*, he is not meant for enjoyment of *prakruti, prakruti* is meant for him, *aatma* is *ananyaartha, aatman* is not *upaadhi*. Body and others are not *nitya. Prakruti* is *anyaartha*. Body comes due to *upaadhi. **Jeevaatma svaroopa* is *nirupaadhika aananda maya*, existing as it is. Because of all these differences, it is *parama purushaartha*, is going to be told here. Whatever *aatman* is told as *paramaartha* here, is the meaning of *paramaartha **samanvitam*. 





## 2

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 2:    
Raajaa uvaacha -   
Bhagavan yat tvayaa proktam paramaartham ayam vachah |   
Shrute tasmin bhramanti iva manaso mama vruttayah ||
_____
 King said - Whatever you told, all the words talking about *paramaartha*, my mind is completely immersed in that wandering in those thoughts only. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bhagavan iti | Paramaartham ayam aatma yaathaatmya pratipaadakatvena   
parama prayojana roopam | Bhramanti parama purushaartha shushrooshayaa   
paryaakulaa bhavanti |
_____
 You talked about the reality of the *aatman*, real characteristics of *aatman*; it is of [[250]]   
utmost use, *parama prayojana*. Now, I want to listen about how it is the *paramaartha*; that my mind is fully anxious to know. 





## 3

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 3:    
Etat viveka vijnyaanam yat ashesheshu jantushu |   
Bhavataa darshitam vipra tat param prakruteh mahat ||
_____
 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Uktam anuvadan evam prashamsati etat iti | Yat cha prakruteh viveka   
vijnyaanam asti tat viveka vijnyaanam yat etat ashesha jantushu anuvruttam |   
Viveka vijnyaanam aatma tattvam, tat prakruteh param - vilakshanam mahat   
cha | 
_____
Whatever was told, he is repeating and praising that. Whatever is the *viveka **vijnyaana*, you told, from *prakruti*, differentiating the knowledge of the special characteristics of *aatman*, which distinguishes it from *prakruti*, that knowledge; and that which is present in all the beings. *Viveka vijnyana* means the *aatman*, which is different and superior to the *prakruti*. 





## 4

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 4:    
Na aham vahaami shibikaam shibikaa na mayi sthitaa |   
Shareeram anyat asmatto yena iyam shibikaa dhrutaa ||
_____
 I am not carrying the palanquin, and palanquin is not standing on me. Body is different from me, and body is carrying the palanquin, and I am not carrying. 





## 5

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 5:    
Gunapravruttyaa bhootaanaam pravruttih karma choditaa |   
Pravartante gunaa hi ete kim mama iti tvayaa uditam || 
_____
The various actions and activities of the beings, it is all because of the *karma*; it happens because of the influence of *gunaas, sattva, rajas, tamas*, which are *gunaas* of *prakruti*, all the time having influence on the *jeevaatman*. This association with *prakruti* has come because of karma. And this is what is making him do various things he is doing here, engaged in so many activities here. Qualities of *prakruti, sattva, rajas, tamas* only are actually responsible for that, and they are only doing all these; it is not mine. 





## 6

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 6:    
Etasmin paramaarthajnya mama shrotra patham gate |   
Mano vihvalataameti paramaarthitaam gatam ||
_____
 This *paramaartha* when I heard from you, whatever words you said, O great *Brahmin* who knows the reality, the ultimate goal which is to be known, when I listen to that, in order to know that *parama prayojana*, I am really happy and satisfied. I feel that I have listened to what one ought to listen. 



[[251]]   

_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Etasmin iti | \* Aatmaa shuddho akshara iti vachanaat | Paramaartha arthitaam   
gatam parama prayojana shravanena arthitaam gatam |   
'Paramaarthaarthataam gatam' iti cha paathah |
_____
 What was told earlier that aatmaa shuddhah, aksharah, etc., whatever words you said about the *paramaartha*. 





## 7

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 7:    
Poorvam eva mahaabhaagam kapila rishim aham dvija |   
Prashtum abhyudyato gatvaa shreyah kim nu atra shamsa me ||
_____
 Earlier itself, in order to enquire about all these, I wanted to go and attain this knowledge from *Kapila Rishi*, who is a great sage. And I wanted to ask him what is *shreyas*, good to me. 





## 8

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 8:    
Tat antare cha bhavataa yat etat vaakyam eeritam |   
Tena eva paramaarthaartham tvayi chetah pradhaavati || 
_____
In between, on the way when I was going, you told all these words, and by this itself, I am very eager to understand what is the *paramaartha* now. 





## 9

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 9:    
Kapila rishih bhagavatah sarva bhootasya vai kila |   
Vishnoh amsho jaganmohanaashaaya urveem upaagatah ||
_____
 *Kapila Rishi* is *Vishnu's amsha* only, and in order to dispel the illusion or *moha*, wrong understanding and knowledge, which is existing on this earth, he has come here as the very *amsha* of *Vishnu*. 
_____
   


## 10
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 10:    
Sa eva bhagavaan noonam asmaakam hitakaamyayaa |   
Pratyakshataam atra gato yathaa etat bhavataa uchyate ||
_____
 Based on what you are telling me, I now thing that that *Kapila Rishi* only has come in front of me in your form. In order to do good to all of us. That he has come directly in front of me here. I think so, because of whatever you told.   
*Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:
_____
** 
_____
**Sa eva iti | Yathaa etat iti | Etat aatma tattvam paramaarthaarthataam gatam   
|
_____
 Because of the *aatma tattva* which you are talking about here. 





## 11

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 11:    
Tanmahyam pranataaya tvam yat shreyah paramam dvija |   
Tatvat aakhila vijnyaana jala veechi udadheeh bhavaan ||
_____
 Again, he asks about that *shreyas*, what is that *shreyas*. Please do instruct me on that. [[252]]   
You are an ocean of that knowledge. \(Just as an ocean has water, tides, etc., you are an embodiment of that knowledge with all the specific aspects\). 





## 12

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 12:    
Braahmana uvaacha -   
Bhoopa prucchasi kim shreyah paramaartham nu prucchasi |   
Shreyaamsi aparamaarthaarthaani asheshaani cha bhoopate ||
_____
 The *Braahmana* replies - You wanted to know about *shreyas* earlier also, you wanted to go to *Kapila Rishi*, in order to know what is *shreyas*. Now, you are talking about *paramaartha*. What is it that you are asking - is it *shreyas* or *paramaartha*? All the *shreyas* that is seen here, is all *aparamaartha* only, and not *paramaartha*. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shreyah kim iti nrupena poorvam uktatvaat, shreyah paramaarthayoh atyanta   
vailakshanyaat tayoh katarat prucchasi iti vikalpayati - bhoopate |   
Aparamaarthaarthaani aparamaartha vastooni; aarshatvaat artha shabdasya   
napumsakatvam | 
_____
There is a great difference between what is *shreyas* and what is *paramaartha*. In this context, *shreyas* is all *loukika*, that which is other than *moksha*. What is taught here is *aatma jnyaana*. Other than *aatma jnyaana*, all others are told as *shreyas* here. *Aatma jnyaana* is told as *paramaartha* here. Among them, which one are you asking, is what he asks. All the objects of enjoyment seen here are all* aparamaartha*. 





## 13

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 13:    
Devataaraadhanam krutvaa dhanasampadam icchati |   
Putraan icchati raajyam cha shreyah tat praapti lakshanam ||
_____
 One by one, he talks about *shreyas*. And then differentiates it from *paramaartha*. By worshipping all the gods like *Indra, Varuna, Agni*, through *yajnya, yaaga*, they want lot of wealth. Or they want children, or kingdom. These are all said to be *shreyas*. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dhanaadi yogaantam uttarottara utkrushtam shreyas saptakam darshayati   
devataa iti tribhih | Devataaraadhanam iti | Tat praapti lakshanam teshaam   
dhana aadeenaam praapti-roopam |
_____
 Starting with wealth, each one is little better than the other, each one is relatively better than the other. *Dhana, putra, raajya*, ... - seven kinds of *shreyas* are told here, by these three *shlokaas*. One is *devataaraadhana*. What is attained from *devataaraadhana* is the *dhana, putra, raajya,* etc. 





## 14

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 14:    
Karma yajnyaatmakam shreyah svarloka phaladaayi yat |   
Shreyah pradhaanam cha phale tat eva anabhisamhite ||
_____
 [[253]]   
The various *yajnya yaagaas* which are done, various *karmaas*, are also *shreyas*, after which they go and attain the *svarga lokaas* and enjoy there. The *karma* which is of the form of *yajnya* and others, which gives fruits of *svarga* and others, is also *shreyas* only. When these *karmaas* are done without desire in fruit, that is also primary *shreyas*, it is said. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Karma iti | Phale anabhisamhite sati, tat eva karma mukhyam shreyah | 
_____
This karma being done, becomes more important than the earlier ones. 





## 15

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 15:    
Aatmaa dhyeyah tadaa bhoopa yoga yuktaih tathaa param |   
Shreyah tasya eva samyogah shreyo yat paramaatmanaa || 
_____
Those who are engaged in *yoga*, they meditate on the *aatman*, they do *dhyaana*. Doing *dhyaana*, meditation, is *shreyas*. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aatmaa iti | Aatmaa dhyeya iti shreyah - tat dhyaanam shreyah iti arthah |   
Tasya eva jeevasya eva paramaatmanaa samyoga aikyam | Shreyo yat   
paramaatmane iti cha paathah |
_____
 When the *jeevaatman* becomes united with *Paramaatman*, that is also *shreyas*. 





## 16
In further *shlokaas*, all these are talked about and it is told why these are *shreyas*, and nor *paramaartha*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 16:    
Shreyaamsi evam anekaani shatasho atha sahasrashah |   
Santi atra paramaarthastu na tu ete shrooyataam cha me ||
_____
 Like this, there are many things which are said to be *shreyas* here. Hundreds and thousands of things which are called *shreyas*. None of these are *paramaartha*, I will tell you what is *paramaartha*. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shreyaamsi iti | Anekaani shaastra uktaani sva utprekshitaani cha | Atra - loke |   
Ete - padaarthaah, na paramaarthaah, na parama prayojanam | Paramaarthah   
tu me - mattah shrayataam | 
_____
All are *vaidika*, told in the *shaastra*. What I have told here, and there are many others also. All these are not *parama prayojana*. Listen to me what is *paramaartha*. I will teach you. 





## 17
He is going to talk about why each one is not *paramaartha*. Each one is told as *shreyas* only. First, he tells about why money is not *shreyas*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 17:    
Dharmaaya tyajyate kim nu paramaartho dhanam yadi | [[254]]   

_____
Vyayah cha kriyate kasmaat kaama praapti upalakshanah ||
_____
 In order to do *dharma*, money is given up, they engage in dharma. One renounces the wealth, and also spends a lot of money for *dharma*. If something is spent or given up, that cannot be *paramaartha*. This is only for attaining some desire. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dhanaadeenaam shreyastvam kramena niraakaroti - dharmaaya ityaadi | Kaama   
praapti upaaya lakshanah kaama praapti hetuh | Dhanam dharma kaamaartham   
tyaajyatvaat na svayam purushaarthah | Yat artham sarvam yat cha na   
anyaartham sah paramaarthah; sa aatmaa eva iti bhaavah; \* Aatmanah tu   
kaamaay sarvam priyah bhavati iti shruteh |
_____
 One by one, in order, that all these are not *shreyas*, are established in these *shlokaas*. In order to attain certain desires, money is spent. That which is spent, or given up or renounced, cannot be *paramaartha. Dharma* and *kaama* among the *purushaarthaas*, and *dhana* is spent. By itself, *dhana* is not *purushaartha*. That for the sake of which everything is meant, that which is not meant for others, that is what can be *paramaartha*. Everything is to serve the purpose of that, and that is not meant for others; that is *paramaartha*. The meaning is that *aatma* is only *paramaartha*. This is also told in *Bruhadaaranyaka Upanishad* that everything happens and exists as per the *sankalpa* of the *aatman* only. Everything is meant for attaining the *aatman*, and *aatman* is not meant for others. That is how it is *paramaartha*. 





## 18

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 18:    
Putrah chet paramaarthah syaat so api anyasya nareshvara |   
Paramaarthabhootah so anyasya paramaartho hi tat pitaa ||
_____
 If you say that *putra* is *paramaartha*, that is also meant for someone else. For a father, *putra* is *paramaartha*, but for a *putra*, his *putra* becomes *paramaartha*. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Putrah chet iti | So api anyasya - sva pituh; paramaarthah | Tat pitaa cha   
anyasya sva pituh paramaarthah | Evam putrasya pitrarthatvaat jagati na   
paramaartho asti | Etat upapaadayati evam na paramaartho asti iti | 
_____
Son is *paramaartha* for a father. The father is *paramaartha* for his father. Like this, if son is meant for father, that way, it is not *paramaartha*. 





## 19

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 19:    
Evam na paramaartho asti jagati asmin chara achare |   
Paramaartho hi kaaryaani kaaranaanaam asheshatah ||
_____
 In this world having movables and immovables, these are all not *paramaartha. **Kaaryaas* are all *paramaartha* with respect to the *kaarana* only. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Asheshena putra aadi kaaryaani kaaranaanaam hi - janakaanaam paramaarthah; [[255]]   

_____
tasmaat na paramaarthah | Ananya artho hi paramaarthah | 
_____
Son is *paramartha* for father. Father is *kaarana*, son is *kaarya*. So, it is not absolute *paramaartha*, but only relative with respect to the father. *Paramaartha* is *ananyaartha*. 





## 20

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 20:    
Raajyaadi praaptih atra uktaa paramaarthatayaa yadi |   
Paramaarthaa bhavanti atra na bhavanti cha vai tatah || 
_____
If you say *raajya*, getting kingdom, expanding kingdom are all *paramaartha*, it will also not become *paramaartha*, 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Raajyaadi praaptih iti | Raajyaadi praaptih paramaartho yadi, tatah - tarhi   
atra - loke, raajyaadayah paramaarthaa bhavanti, na bhavanti cha - nashyanti   
cha | Katham asthiraa raajyaadayah paramaartha iti bhaavah | Etat   
asthiratvam putraadishu api samaanam |
_____
 One day you have a vast kingdom, on the next day, someone will come and conquer your kingdom; so you have no more your kingdom. It is not permanent. So, it cannot be *paramaartha*. They are all not permanent, it is the same way with *putra*, and others. 





## 21

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 21:    
Rig yajus saama nishpaadyam yajnya karma matam tava |   
Paramaartha bhootam tatra api shrooyataam gadato mama ||
_____
 If you think that *yajnya* and other *karmaas*, which are basically done with *Rig, Yajus, **Saama* and other *Veda mantraas *- if you think that that is *paramaartha*, even with respect to that, listen to me, I will tell you why that is also not *paramaartha*. 
_____
   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dharmasya nashvaratvam anumaanena darshayati - rig ityaadinaa |
_____
 From these three *shlokaas*, it is told that *dharma* is also *nashvara*. So, it is also not *purushaartha*. 





## 22

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 22:    
Yat tu nishpaadyate kaaryam mrudaa kaarana bhootayaa |   
Tat kaarana anugamanaat jnyaayate nrupa mrunmayam ||
_____
 Whatever is created, the effect, *kaarya* pot and others, from mud which is the cause, that is known only because *kaarana* is continuing in that. Lump of mud became pot, but we identify that also as mud only. Everything is *mrunmaya, Mruttiketi eva **satyam*, says *Upanishad*. From mud whatever is made is *mrunmaya*, everything is *mrunmaya. Mrut* is continuing everywhere. *Kaarana* is continuing there. 





## 23

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 23:  [[256]]   

_____
Evam vinaashibhih dravyaih samit aajya kusha aadibhih |   
Nishpaadyate kriyaa yaa tu saa bhavitree vinaashinee ||
_____
 And that *mrunmaya*, whatever pot is created from *mrut*, which is told as *mrunmaya*, the mud got destroyed and pot came. When the pot got destroyed, *kapaala* comes. *Kapaala* is also *mrunmaya*, but the previous state is destroyed. It is *vinaashi* because it is created from a *vinaashi dravya* only. It is not *avinaashi*, as it undergoes changes in its essential nature itself. Similarly, *yajnya* is also like that. *Yajnya* is performed with *samit, darbhaa*, and ghee and other *aajyaas*. All those are *vinaashi dravyaas*, which get destroyed, and keep undergoing changes, in their essential nature itself. *Yajnya* which is an outcome of using all these things is also not permanent. Once the *yajnya* is completed, it is also over. The set of acts, the *yajnya*, which is performed with all these ingredients, that also has to get destroyed sometime; it will get ended sometime, and there will be no *yajnya* afterwards; so it is also temporary only. 





## 24

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 24:    
Anaashee paramaarthah cha praajnyaih abhyupagamyate |   
Tat tu naashi na sandeho naashi dravya upapaaditam ||
_____
 That which does not get destroyed, is only *paramaartha* is what all the knowledgeable ones are agreeing on. What is obtained from a *naashi dravya*, material itself undergoing change or getting destroyed, that again cannot be permanent, and that also is *naashi* only, gets destroyed, keeps changing its state, undergoes modifications. 





## 25

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 25:    
Tat eva aphaladam karma paramaartho matah tava |   
Mukti saadhana bhootatvaat paramaartho na saadhanam ||
_____
 Next, the *aphaladam karma, karma* done with *anabhisamhita phala, phala abhisandhi **rahita karma*, without desire in *phala*, in the fruits, the karma which is done, if you think that is *paramaartha*, it is only *saadhanaa* for *mukti. Saadhanaa* itself cannot be *paramaartha*. Means itself cannot become the *saadhana*, because it is the means to attain *moksha*. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tat eva iti | Tat eva - yajnya karma eva | Chet na iti adhyaahaarah | Na hi   
paramaartho anyasya saadhanam | 
_____
*Paramaartha* cannot be the means for attaining something else. 



*Dhana, putra, raajya, karma* obtained from *rig-yajus-saama*, and also *karmaas* done using the *naashi dravyaas*, are all not permanent. Only *avinaashi* is *paramaartha. **Paramaartha* is not *anyaartha*, it is *ananyaartha. Aparamaartha* is all *anyaartha. **Phala abhisamhita rahita karma* is also not *paramaartha*, because *saadhanaa* is not *paramaartha*. 



[[257]]   
*Dhyaana* is told, and couple of more things will be told. Then it will be told as to what is *paramaartha*, in the next few *shlokaas*. 



We are at the end of *Amsha* 2, Chapter 14, where the *Mahaa yogi Bharata* is teaching *Souveera Raaja*, what is *aatma jnyaana* and what is *paramaartha*. He shows how money and other things are not *paramaartha*, because they get spent, and how the kingdom and other things are also not *paramaartha*. They are all not permanent. Also the *yajnya karma* is also not *paramaartha*, because *yajnya karma* is performed with materials which themselves get destroyed - they are all *naashi dravyas*, like *samit, kusha*, etc. Something obtained from *naashi dravyaas* cannot be permanent - so it is also not *paramaartha*. If *karmaas* are done without desire in fruits, *phala anabhisamhita karma*, that is also not *paramaartha* because that is *paramparayaa saadhana* to *moksha*. That which is *saadhana* is not *paramaartha*. 





## 26

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 26:    
Dhyaanam naiva aatmano bhoopa paramaartha artha shabditam |   
Bhedakaari parebhyah tu paramaartho na bhedavaan ||
_____
 *Aatma dhyaana* is said to be *paramaartha artha*. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dhyaanam iti | Paramaartha artha shabditam dhyaanam na parama prayojana   
bhoota vastu shabda vaachyam | Yatah tat parebhyo ghataadibhyo bhedam   
karoti iti bhedakaari, vishada vishatara aadi avasthaabhedam svasya karoti |   
Na evam avasthaa bhedena vaishamyam paramaarthasya | Yat vaa, bhedakaari   
- smruti pratyayatvena kshana bhanguratvaat | Na tu paramaartho bhangurah |
_____
 *Aatma dhyaana* is not the *parama prayojana bhoota vastu*. It differentiates from *ghata* and other things - the *aatma dhyaana*, and that is one reason why it is not *paramaartha*. It creates different kinds of experiences, like vivid, more vivid, most vivid, like this - there are *avasthaa bhedaas*, which are not there in the *paramaartha. Paramaartha* cannot have these kinds of differences in experience. There is one more explanation given - *dhyaana* is nothing but *anusmruti, **smruti* after *smruti*, continuous remembrance of the object of meditation; every instant it is a separate remembrance; so instant after instant, without any break in between and without any other thought coming in between, one has to meditate upon the object of meditation. Because it has to be meditated upon every instant, it stays for one *kshana*, and then another *kshana - paramaartha* cannot be like that. 





## 27
The next one is a very important *shloka*, which is quoted in many places. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 27:    
Paramaatmaatmaatmano yogah paramaartha iti eeshyate |   
Mithyaa etat anyat dravyam hi na eti tat dravyataam yatah ||
_____
 *Yoga* means *sambandha*, in this case, it means *aikya*, because the second part of the *shloka* says *mithyaa etat*. What is false, *mithya* is the *paramaatma-aatma aikya*, identity. If you like to think that *aikya* of *paramaatma* and *aatma* is *aikya*, then that is not true, it is false, because such a thing cannot happen at all. Because [[258]] one *dravya* cannot become another *dravya*. 



This is also told by *Sri Nammaalvaar* in *Tiruvaimoli, Koodaamaiyai koodinaalum **aduvum aduve iduvum iduve*; even if *Paramaatman* and *jeevaatman* go and merge, *Paramaatman* remains *Paramaatman* only, and *jeevaatman* remains *jeevaatman* only. There is so much difference and distinction between them that one cannot become the other. The second reason is that there is no *svaroopa naasha* in any of these. *Kaarya* is *avasthaantaraapatti*, even *kaarya* merges into *kaarana*. For *achetana*, there is *svaroopa vikaara*, but there is no *svaroopa naasha*. For *chetanaas*, there is no *vikaara* in *svaroopa* also. So, *Paramaatman* and *jeevaatman* cannot become united where *jeevaatman* loses its *svaroopa* itself. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Paramaatma iti | Ishyate yadi iti sheshah | Yogah taadaatymyam, anyathaa   
uttara ardheh na asangate | Etat aikyam mithyaa; tatra hetuh anyat iti |   
Poorveshu dhana aadishu nashvaratva aadi; yoge tu svaroopa abhaavah |
_____
 *Yoga* is oneness or identity, which is used by other systems of philosophy, as *aikya*. The *taadaatymya* what we say is oneness, *ekee bhaava*, it is not *svaroopa aikya*, but *ekee bhaava*. This is told even in *pralaya*. Otherwise, it will not be proper with the second part of this *shloka*, which says *mithyaa etat. Aikya* is *mithyaa*. The earlier things which were told - *dhana, yajnya karma*, etc. are all *nashvara*, impermanent; they don't remain forever and get destroyed. Whereas here, in *aatma paramaatma **yoga*, what is meant is that if it means *aikya*, then that would be *svaroopa **naasha* itself. That cannot be *paramaartha*, and it is not true at all, because it is *mithyaa*. 





## 28

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 28:    
Tasmaat shreyaamsi asheshaani nrupa etaani na samshayah |   
Paramaarthah tu bhoopaala sankshepaat shrooyataam mama ||
_____
 Now, he is concluding all the things which he said - which is not *paramaartha*, and which is *paramaartha. Yogi Bharata* is telling what is *paramaartha*. O King, all these things are called *shreyas*, there is no doubt. But they are not *paramaartha*. Listen to me about *paramaartha*, I will tell you. 
_____
   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Upasamharati tasmaat iti | Etaani dhana aadeeni shreyaamsi eva na tu   
paramaarthah | Paramaarthah tu shrooyataam |
_____
 *Dhana*, and others are all *shreyas*, but are not *paramaartha*. 





## 29
From here, he starts to tell about what is *paramaartha*, and *aatma svaroopa*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 29:    
Eko vyaapee samah shuddho nirgunah prakrute parah |   
Janma vruddhi aadi rahitah aatmaa sarvagato avyayah ||
_____
 These are all the attributes of *aatman* told here. Explained below. 



[[259]]   
*Atman* is one and not like body which has many forms into which it grows. ' *Diha **upachaye*' is the root for the word *deha,* that which grows. And there are so many ' *aneka*' parts of *deha* while *Atman* is one, *Ekah*. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Paramaartham aah - eka iti | Ekah - dehavat na anekah upachaya roopah |
_____
 *Eka* means not like *deha. Deha* undergoes *baalya avasthaa, youvana avasthaa, jaraa*, etc., it keeps on changing, there is growth, there is deterioration; whereas *paramaartha*, which is *jeevaatman* is not like that; it is *eka*, remains the same all the time. 



Like the body, he does not have many states, like increasing, decreasing, etc. *Upachaya* means growth. 




_____
Vyaapee - jnyaanena sarva vyaapana svabhaavah |
_____
 He is *vyaapee*, means that he can pervade everywhere, through his *dharma bhoota **jnyaana*. 




_____
Deva manushyaadeenaam vishameshu deheshu sthito api samah - parasparam   
cha samah |
_____
 He is *sama*, though he is present in various kinds of bodies which are all very different from each other - one is very big, one is small, they have different characteristics, *deva, manushya, pashu, pakshi, praani*, but in every body, he is similar; all the *aatmans* have the same attributes, same *svaroopa*; they are similar mutually also, all are jnyaana aakaaraas only. 




_____
Shuddhah - svato nirmalah | Nirgunah - sattva aadi rahitah | Tatra hetuh -   
prakruteh parah - janma aadi shat bhaava vikaara rahitah |
_____
 He is *shuddha*, in his real state, he does not have any defects, but due to *karma*, he has got caught in this *samsaara*. He is *nirguna*, means he does not have the qualities of *prakruti*, which are *sattva, rajas, tamas*; he is superior to *prakruti*; and he also does not have *asti, jaayate, vardhate, viparinamate, apaksheeyate, nashyati *- the six *bhaava vikaaraas*, he does not have all these *bhaava vikaaraas* of *prakruti. Shat **bhaava* means different kinds of characteristics. 



He is bereft of *janma, vruddhi, parinaama, apakshaya, naasha*, which are all for the body only; it is not there for the *jeevaatman*. 




_____
Aatmaa - chetanah |
_____
 *Aatma* means that it is *chetana*, which is *jnyaana aashrayatva*, he is *aashraya* to *jnyaana*. 




_____
Sarva gatah - naashakaanaam agni jala aadeenaam soukshmyena vyaapakah |
_____
 *Sarva gata* means that even *agni, jala*, etc, which are all *sookshma*, they destroy other things by entering inside, being *sookshma*, but he is more *sookshma* than that; he can pervade even them. [[260]]   





_____
Ato daaha aadi rahitah |
_____
 He does not have *daaha* and others things; he does not get burnt, as he can enter into *agni* also. 




_____
Avyayah - avikalah |
_____
 He is *niravayavi*, partless. 



These are some of the characteristics of the *aatman* told. 





## 30

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 30:    
Parajnyaanamayo asadbhih naama jaati aadibhih vibhuh |   
Na yogavaan na yukto abhoot naiva paarthiva yokshyate ||
_____
 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Parajnyaana maya iti | Parajnyaana mayah - prakrushta jnyaana svaroopah |   
Paramajnyaana mayah iti cha paathah | Para shabdena vishaya jnyaanam   
vyaavartyate | 
_____
He is *jnyaana svaroopa*. He has superior knowledge, and not the *vishaya jnyaana*, not the knowledge about sense objects. 




_____
Sukha samvit svaroopa iti arthah |
_____
 He is *jnyaana aananda svaroopa*. 




_____
Asadbhih - vinaashibhih deva aadi naama roopaih kaala traye api ayuktah |
_____
 *Asad* means those which get destroyed, *naama jaati*, etc. name, class, etc. He never gets associated with that. He was never connected earlier also, and in future also, he will not be associated with *jaati, naama*, etc. No connection with *jaati, naama*, in past, present, future. 




_____
Vibhuh - deha indriyaanaam svamee; svatah svaraat iti vaa |
_____
 *Vibhu* means he is the Lord of body and *indriyaas*. He is *svaraat*, means when he gets *karma svaatantrya*, he gets released from the bondage of *karma *- he is said to be *sva svaraat bhavati*. 





## 31

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 31:    
Tasya aatma paradeheshu sato api ekamayam hi yat |   
Vijnyaanam paramaartho asou dvaitino atathyadarshinah || 
_____





_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Evam eko vyaapee ityaadinaa aatma svaroopam uktam | 
_____
By the words *eka, vyaapee*, etc. the *aatma svaroopa* was told. 




_____
Idaaneam tasya deva aadi roopeshu aatma paradeheshu sato api eka prakaaram   
yat vijnyaanam vijnyaana roopam asou paramaartha iti aaha - tasya iti |
_____
 After telling about *aatma svaroopa*, though he exists in his own body, and other [[261]]   
bodies, when he is present in *deha, indriya*, and other bodies, of oneself and others, he is always of the same *prakaara, jnyaana svaroopa* only, this is the *paramaartha*, reality of the *aatman*. 




_____
Deva aadi deheshu sthitasya aatmanah tat roopena bhinnatva prateetih   
bhraantih iti aaha - dvaitena iti |
_____
 Those who see as different, that the *aatman* in one body is very different from the *aatman* in another body, in *svaroopa* also, if he understands like that, that is not correct, not real. Those who see differences or duality in *aatmaas*, that is not real. 





## 32
This is an often quoted *shloka*, and is explained in detail in *Sri Bhaashya*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 32:    
Venu randhra vibhedena bhedah shadja aadi sanjnitah |   
Abheda vyaapino vaayoh tathaa asya paramaatmanah ||
_____
 How it is the same *jnyaana aakaara* in all the bodies, is explained with an example. A flute has many holes, and when the wind is blown, the air goes through each one, and when different holes are covered, different sounds are produced, like *Sa Ri Ga Ma ..., **Shadja, Daivata, Madhyama, Panchama*, etc., with different combinations of the holes. But the same air passes through all of them. When it passes through different holes, it takes different *svaraas*. This way, they are all different, and the air particles which go through each one are also different. They are all independent, but are all air only. They are identified as *shadja*, etc. when they pass through these holes. But by nature, everything is air only. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aatmano hi svaroopena parasparam bhinnaah, na tu deva aadi roopena, teshaam   
atadroopatvasya uktatvaat | 
_____
This is the background which we have to understand before we read this *shloka. **Jeevaatmans* are many, and are different in *svaroopa*. There is a *jeevaatman* in one body, and is another *jeevaatman* in another body. They are not different because of the form of the appearance, *deva, manushya*, etc., but they are *jnyaana aakaaraas*. 




_____
Kechit atra aatmanaam svaroopena bhedo nishidyata iti aahuh; tat ayuktam | \*   
Tasya aatma paradeheshu, \* Tatra tvam aham api atra, \* Aham tvam cha tathaa   
anye cha, \* Tvam cha anye cha iti aadi aatma bahutva pratipaadaka   
bahuvachana virodhaat, shruti smruti sootra nyaaya virodhaat cha |
_____
 Some say that there is no *bheda* in *svaroopa* also, meaning that there is only one single *aatma* in all the bodies, that there are not multiple *aatmaas *- that is not true. It is told in *Shrutis* that *Nityo nityaanaam chetanah chetanaanaam eko bahoonaam yo **vidhadhaati kaamaan*, this shows multiplicity of *aatmans*. This is told in the *shlokaas* here itself - You are there in that body, and I am here; Myself, you and others also; meaning that each individual self exists separately, is different; there are many individual selves, but all are of the same nature. If we say that *aatman* is only one, in all the bodies, and that there are not multiple *aatmans*, if the *aatma **bahutva* is not told, it is opposed to what was taught here itself in so many *shlokaas*, which are telling about *aatma bahutva*. It is also against *Shruti, Smruti, Nyaaya*, etc. [[262]]   





_____
Yadi deva aadi roopena aatmanaam na bhedah, katham tarhi devo ayam,   
manushyo ayam iti vaishamyena vyavahaara upapadyate? Tatra aaha - venu   
randhra iti |
_____
 If there is no difference, *bheda* in the form of *deva, manushya*, etc. how can we even say that this is *deva*, this is *namushya*, etc.? Then everyone should be addressed in the same way. How can we address different individuals differently? This is answered in this *shloka*. 




_____
Yathaa venoh aneka randhra vartinaam vaayu amshaanaam vaayutvena eka   
aakaaraanaam randhra bheda vinishkramana kruta shadja aadi sanjnyaa   
bhedah; evam aatmanaam jnyaana eka aakaaraanaam deva aadi deha pravesha   
aakruto deva aadi vyavahaarah, na tu taadroopya krutah | 
_____
The *vaayu amshaas*, which are there in various holes, which are all of the same nature as they are all *vaayu* only, they go through different *randhraas*, which cause one to be *Shadja*, another to be *Madhyama*, another to be *Daivata*, the difference exists. In the same way, the *aatmaas*, are of the same nature of *jnyaana*, consciousness, enter into the body of *deva, manushya*, etc., and one is called *deva*, another is called *manushya*, etc. The *aatman* itself does not become of the form of the body. The *aatman* itself does not change the *svaroopa*, it is *eka svaroopa*. 




_____
Abheda vyaapinah abhedena vaayutva aakaarena vyaapinah |
_____
 Without any difference, in the same form as *vaayu*, it is pervading everywhere. 




_____
Atra paramaatma shabdena aatmaa eva uchyate, \* Paramaatmaa iti cha api ukto   
dehe asmin purushah parah; \* Taih eva vigatah shuddhah paramaatmaa   
nigadyate, ityaadi darshanaat |
_____
 The word *Paramaatman* is used here. The meaning of *Paramaatman* is *aatman* only here. Because of the context, and it is *aatma jnyaana* which is being taught. An example is given about how the *jeevaatman* existing in this body is told as *Paramaatman*. Another reference where *jeevaatman* is told by the name *Paramaatman* is given. 





## 33

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 14, Shloka 33:    
Eka svaroopa bhedah cha baahya karma vruti prajah |   
Deva aadi bhede apadhvaste na asti eva aavarane hi sah || 
_____





_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Uktam artham vivrunvan upasamharati eka svaroopa iti | 
_____
Again explaining whatever was taught so far, he is concluding the teaching here. 




_____
Eka svaroopa bhedah - \* Tasya aatma paradeheshu sato api ekamayam hi yat |   
Vijnyaanam paramaartho asou \* iti ukta jnyaana eka svaroopasya aatmano   
bhedah deva aadi roopah, baahya karma vruti prajah - baahya karma aavarana   
jaatah | 
_____
*Jeevaatmans* who are of the same *svaroopa* as *jnyaana aakaara*, the *bheda* seen, the [[263]]   
difference as *deva, manushya*, etc., is meant here. The differences of the form of *deva, manushya*, etc., of the *jeevaatmans*, who are of the same nature, *jnyaana **aakaara*, is because of the karma, as told here. Though he is existing in his body and other bodies, he is of the same nature everywhere. He is fully made of consciousness. Because he is covered by the *karma*, external *karma*, his nature is covered. So, he is not realizing his nature. *Prajah* means *prakarshena jaayate*. The *baahya karma* is covering it. 




_____
Phala abhisandhi yuktam bhagavati asamarpitam cha baahya karma, aatmanah   
svaroopa bahirbhootam vaa, yathaa vakshyati \* Avidyaa karma sanjnyaa anyaa   
... tayaa tirohitatvaat cha shaktih kshetra samjnyitaa | Sarva bhooteshu   
bhoopaala taaratamyena vartate || iti |
_____
 *Baahya karma* is that *karma* done with desire in the fruits, and that which is not surrendered into *Paramaatman*. One wants to enjoy oneself. He thinks that he is only the enjoyer of the fruits, that he is only doing the *karma*, and he has desire in the fruits. When one does such a *karma*, it is called *baahya karma*. It is outside *aatman's **svaroopa. Aatma svaroopa* is not like that. *Aatma svaroopa* is *bhagavat sheshabhoota*, that he cannot independently do anything; by nature, he is utterly subservient to *Paramaatman*, and he has to do all kinds of service to *Paramaatman* at every stage; this is his very nature. Whereas if one thinks that he is doing the various *karmaas*, does with a desire in fruits, thinking of himself as the enjoyer, this is *baahya karma*. In reality, the *pradhaana phali* is *Paramaatman* only for all the *karmaas*. Because of that wrong understanding and performing *karmaas* in that manner, this difference of *deva, manushya*, is coming. *Aatmaas* are all of the same nature, *jnyaana aakaaraas. Karma* is making them to get these kind of bodies, and experience the fruits. *Sri Engal Aalwaan* gives *pramaanaas*, which will come later. 



*Avidyaa* is also called *karma. Chetana* and *achetanaas* are the *shaktis* of *Paramaatman*, and *avidyaa* is also one *shakti*, called *karma*. Because he is covered by that, by which the *shakti* called *kshetrajnya* is covered by the *shakti* called *avidyaa*, called *karma*; in all the beings, there is a *pramaana* which says that *dharma bhoota jnyaana* undergoes *sankocha vikaasa*. In our *siddhaanta*, it is well established that *dharma bhoota jnyaana* undergoes *sankocha vikaasa; **samsaara* comes because it has become *sankuchita*. For this, there is a *pramaana* in *Vishnu Puraana*, which will come. In all beings, there are differences, various degrees. For those who have not much *sankocha*, they will be in *punya **janmaas*. For those who have very much contracted *dharma bhoota jnyaana*, they will be born as *pashus, pakshis, keeta, vruksha*, etc. This is the difference for the bodies they take. 




_____
Deva aadi bhedah cha ayam yugapat anekeshaam ekasya cha kaala bhedena   
apadhvaste aavarane - karma aavarane, sa deva aadi bhedo na bhavati | 
_____
These differences seen in the bodies of *deva, manushya*, etc. - for many of them, when it gets destroyed, over a period of time, the *karma* which is covering, that *aavarana* will not be there any more. That cover will not be there. It can be a difference in time, or it can be the same time for many of them. *Moksha* has got a [[264]]   
beginning, *aadi*, but it does not have an end. For *karma, aadi* is not there, but *anta* is there. 




_____
Deva aadi bheda apadhvasta it cha paathah | Yathaa aaha shounakah \*   
Karminaam karmabhedena deva bhedaadayo yatah || Karmakshayaat   
asheshaanaam bhedaanaam samkshayah tatah || iti | 
_____
Because of the difference in *karma*, various *karmaas* that the individual does, they take various births. When the *karmaas* get destroyed, all the differences will go. In their *svaroopa*, they will be *jnyaana eka aakaara*. And all the individual selves for whom the *karma* gets destroyed, they will get liberated. 



This is the nature of *jeevaatman* taught in all these *shlokaas*. 



This completes Chapter Fourteen. 



*|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Dviteeye Amshe Chaturdasho Adhyaayah ||** **|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Dviteeye Amshe Chaturdasho **Adhyaayah ||** 
_____
* [[265]]   

_____
   
|| Atha Panchadasho Adhyaayah ||   
Rubhu-Nidaagha Samvaada** *



Now, Chapter Fifteen. 


