+++
title = "15"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 1:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Ityukte mouninam bhooyah chintayaanam maheepatim |   
Prati uvaacha atha vipro asou advaita antargataam kathaam ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- When he was taught all these things by *Mahaayogi Bharata*, the King *Souveera Mahaaraaja * started to think about the *aatma svaroopa*, the *paramaartha * which was told, what was not *paramaartha*, etc., he went into deep thinking. And again, he told *Bharata*. There is a story which is also teaching a similar thing, where *aatma svaroopa * is being taught. That story he started to recite. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ityukta iti | Iti ukte - evam aatmano vaishamya abhaava ukte | Kshut pipaasa   
aadi dharmakatva bhraantyaa aatmano dvaitam chintayaanam mouninam   
vaachaa achodayantam maheepatim abhipraayajnyo viprah chitvastu vaishamya   
abhaava vishayaam kathaam uvaacha |*** In this way, it was told that the *aatmans * are all of the same nature; that the essential nature of all *aatmans * is the same. When he was still thinking, still not very clear; that the body appearance is one thing - the *deva, manushya*, etc., but how about hunger, thirst, etc. he started to think about them. Is hunger, thirst real, not real, is it in *aatma svaroopa*, or not, is it due to karma, etc., he started to think. The difference can still exist because things like thirst, hunger, are different for different people. It is something other than the form of the body which is seen. The king was silent thinking about this. The *Braahmana * knew what the king was thinking. He then started to tell him a story about this, to clear those doubts. That there is no difference in the *chit vastu*, all are *jnyaana eka aakaaraas * only. With respect to this, he started to tell one more story. In which thirst, hunger are all addressed. 





## 2
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 2:    
Braahmanah -   
Shrooyataam nrupa shaardoola yat geetam rubhunaa puraa |   
Avabodham janayataa nidaaghasya mahaatmanah ||*** *Braahmana *- O King, listen to this story of *Rubhu * and *Nidaagha*, whatever *Rubhu * taught to *Nidaagha*, in order to enlighten him, with proper knowledge. *Nidaagha * also was a great person, *yogi*. In order to enlighten him with proper knowledge, *Rubhu * taught him. I will tell you that. 





## 3
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 3:  ***Page **266** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Rubhuh naama abhavat putro brahmanah parameshthinah |   
Vijnyaata tattva sadbhaavo nisargaat eva bhoopate ||*** *Chaturmukha Brahma * had a son called *Rubhu*. By nature itself, he had *tattva **jnyaana*, the knowledge of the realities. 





## 4
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 4:    
Tasya shishyo nidaagho abhoot pulastya tanayah puraa |   
Praadaat ashesha vijnyaanam sa tasmai parayaa mudaa ||*** He had a student by name *Nidaagha*, who was *Pulastya Brahma's * son. To that *Nidaagha*, he gave all his knowledge, very happily. 





## 5
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 5:    
Avaapta jnyaana tantrasya na tasya advaita vaasanaam |   
Sa rubhuh tarkayaamaasa nidaaghasya nareshvara ||*** *Rubhu * after teaching everything to *Nidaagha*, started to argue to himself that still his *advaita vaasanaa * is not gone. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Avaapta iti | Jnyaana tantram adhyaatma shaastram | Advaita vaasanaa na iti   
tarkayaamaasa | Na tasya advaita vaasanaam iti cha paathah |*** The *shaastra * which is teaching about *aatman. Advaita vaasanaa * is not there. *Advaita **vaasanaa * means that they are all of the same nature. That he has still not understood that all *aatmans * are of the same *jnyaana svaroopa*. 





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 6:    
Devikaayaah tate veera nagaram naama vai puram |   
Samruddham ati ramyam cha pulastyena niveshitam ||*** On the banks of the river *Devikaa*, there was a city called *Veera Nagara*. It had all the wealth, and it was a very beautiful place. *Pulastya * had built that city. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 7:    
Ramya upavana paryante sa tasmin paarthiva uttama |   
Nidaagho naama yogajnyah rubho shishyo avasat puraa ||*** *Rubhu shishya Nidaagha*, was living there, near the forest, a beautiful forest. He was a *yogi*. 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 8:    
Divye varsha sahasre tu samateete asya tat puram |   
Jagaama sa rubhuh shishyam nidaagham avalokakah ||*** One thousand *Divya varshaas*, the years of the *Devaas*, passed. At that time, *Rubhu * again wanted to see *Nidaagha*. He came there in order to see him, at *Veera Nagara*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Divye varsha iti | Avalokakah - avalokayitum | ***



Page **267** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 





## 9
**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 9:    
Sa tasya vaishva deva ante dvaaraalokana gochare |   
Sthitah tena gruheetaardhyo nija veshma praveshitah || ***When *Nidaagha * who was a *yogajnya*, was performing his *nitya karma anushthaana*, after performing *Vaishva Deva yaaga*, he came to the door, and at the door, saw that *Rubhu * was standing there. He offered him *arghya*, and took him inside his house. 





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 10:    
Prakshaalita anghri paanim cha kruta aasana parigraham |   
Uvaacha sa dvija shreshtho bhujyataam iti saadaram ||*** He gives him *paadya*, and cleans his feet, and gives him a set to be seated. With great respect, he told him O great *Brahmin*, and does *atithi satkaara*. He tells him - Please partake food in our house. 



*Nidaagha * does not recognize *Rubhu*. 





## 11
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 11:    
Rubhuh -   
Bho vipravarya bhoktavyam yat annam bhavato gruhe |   
Tat kathyataam kadanneshu na preetih satatam mama ||*** *Rubhu *- O great *Brahmin*, tell me what is there to eat in your house? It is not like ordinary food. I want something special. 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 12:    
Nidaaghah -   
Saktu yaavaka vatyaanaam apoopaanaam cha me gruhe |   
Yat rochate dvija shreshtha tat tvam bhunkshva yathaa icchayaa ||*** *Saktu * is rice flour mixed with jaggery, which stays for many days. *Yaavaka * is made of wheat. *Vaatya * is barley and others. *Apoopa * is rice cake. *Nidaagha * says that these are all there in the house. Whatever you like, you can take as much as you like. 





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 13:    
Rubhu -   
Kadannaani dvija etaani mrushtam annam prayaccha me |   
Samyaava paayasaadeeni drapsa phaanitavanti cha || ****Rubhu *- These are all ordinary food items, I don't want all these things. Give me delicious savouries. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kadannaani iti | Mrushtam - ruchyam madhuram vaa | Samyaavah -   
yavagodhooma vikaaro rajju roopo bhakshyah | Drapsam dadhidhanetarat |   
Phaanitam vikruta goudaani |*** *Mrushtam * means that which is sweet, and tasty. *Samyaavah * is wheat flour and others, and a couple of flours which are mixed, which is like a rope, like *chakli, murukku*, etc. *Drapsam * is curd which is not very thick, like buttermilk. *Paanitam * is special dishes made of jaggery. I want all these delicacies, good sweets, *paayasa*, etc. Page **268** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 14:    
Nidaaghah -   
He he shaalini mat gehe yat kinchit ati shobhanam |   
Bhakshya upasaadhanam mrushtam tena asya annam prasaadaya ||*** *Nidaagha * addresses his wife - Whatever is there which is very tasty, and very special in our house, and the various items which are used to make special delicacies, prepare something out of these, and offer to this *atithi*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
He he shaalini iti | Shaalaa - gruham, tadvati, gruhinee iti arthah |*** 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 15:    
Braahmanah -   
Iti uktaa tena saa patnee mrushtam annam dvijasya yat |   
Prasaaditavatee tat vai bhartuh vachana gouravaat || ****Braahmana Bharata *- Having told like this, listening to her husband's words, she prepares really good food, delicacies. And offers to the *atithi*. 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 16:    
Tam bhuktavantam icchaato mrushtam annam mahaamunim |   
Nidaaghah praaha bhoopaala prashrayaa avanatasthitah ||*** Once he took the special delicacies which were offered to him, that *Muni Rubhu*, addressed *Nidaagha*, with great respect and love. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 17:    
Nidaagha -   
Api te paramaa truptih utpannaa tushtih eva cha |   
Api te maanasam svastham aahaarena krutam dvija ||*** *Nidaagha *- O *Brahmin*, were you satisfied, happy with what you had? With what was offered? Is your mind pleased with the food which was offered to you? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Api iti | Truptih - kshut pipaasa aadi nivruttih, tushtih - alam buddhih, manasah   
kshobha abhaavah svaasthyam | Api te manasah svaasthyam iti cha paathah |*** This is the doubt which *Souveera Mahaaraaja * had, sensing which *Bharata * is narrating this story. *Trupti * is thirst and hunger. *Tushti * is sufficiency, was it enough in quantity, was it enough to quench your hunger, thirst. Are you happy in your mind also? 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 18:    
Kvanivaaso bhavaan vipra kva cha gantum samudyatah |   
Aagamyate cha bhavataa yatah tat cha dvija uchyataam ||*** Now, *Nidaagha * asks *Rubhu *- Where do you live? O *Brahmin*, where is your place of living? Where are you going from here? From where are you coming? Please do tell me all that. *** ***Page **269** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kva iti | Kva nivaasa iti bahuvreehih | Yatra saayamgruha itivat |*** *Kva nivaasah * is addressed to *Rubhu *- which is your place of living. Travellers travelling from place to place taking a long journey, at the end of the day, they go and stay in some place. They start their journey the next day, and again at the end of the day, they stay in some place. This is called *Saayamgruhaa gatih*. Are you passing through this place like that? 



Further *Rubhu * starts to teach the *aatma svaroopa*. These are similar to what *Souveera Mahaaraaja * asks *Bharata*. * *



We are at the end of *Amsha * 2, Chapter 15, where the story of *Sri Bharata*, the great yogi is reciting the story of *Rubhu * and *Nidaagha*, to *Souveera Mahaaraaja*. *Rubhu * comes to teach the *paramaartha * to his *shishya Nidaagha*, who, he thought had not really attained that true knowledge. And seeing a *Brahmin * come to his house, after finishing *Vaishvedeva, Nidaagha * invites him and offers him food. *Rubhu * says that he wants really good savouries, *mrushtaanna*, and do not want ordinary food, "I don't want *amrushtaanna*". As per his wish, *Nidaagha's * wife prepares all the good food, and they serve him. After that, *Nidaagha * asks his *atithi Rubhu *- 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 17:    
Nidaagha -   
Api te paramaa truptih utpannaa tushtih eva cha |   
Api te maanasam svastham aahaarena krutam dvija ||*** *Nidaagha *- O *Brahmin*, were you satisfied, was that enough for you? Was it sufficient for you? Are you pleased in your mind? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Api iti | Truptih - kshut pipaasa aadi nivruttih, tushtih - alam buddhih, manasah   
kshobha abhaavah svaasthyam | Api te manasah svaasthyam iti cha paathah |*** *Trupti * is hunger and thirst being quenched. *Tushti * is *alam buddhi*. ***   


## 18
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 18:    
Kvanivaaso bhavaan vipra kva cha gantum samudyatah |   
Aagamyate cha bhavataa yatah tat cha dvija uchyataam ||*** Where are you staying? Where are you coming from, and where are you proceeding from here? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kva iti | Kva nivaasa iti bahuvreehih | Yatra saayamgruha itivat | ***The travellers stay every evening in one place, and continue the journey from there the next day. Page **270** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 19:    
Rubhuh -   
Kshudyasya tasya bhukte anne truptih braahmana jaayate |   
Na me kshut abhavat truptim kasmaat maam dvija prucchasi || ****Rubhu *- O *Brahmin*, one who is hungry, if he eats, has food, then he will be satisfied. I never had hunger. So why are you asking me whether my hunger was satisfied? I never had hunger in the first place. 





## 20
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 20:    
Vanhinaa paarthive dhaatou kshapite kshut samudbhavah |   
Bhavati ambhasi cha ksheene nrunaam trut api jaayate || ***The *paarthiva dhaatu * which is there in the body, if that is digested or reduced by means of the *jaatharaagni*, the fire in the stomach, then only one feels hunger. When the water component in the body is dried up, they feel thirst. 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 21:    
Kshut trushne deha dharmaakhye na mama ete yato dvija |   
\(Tatah kshut sambhava abhaavat truptih asti eva me sadaa | \)   
Tatah kshut sambhavaat truptih api na asti eva me sadaa ||*** Hunger and thirst are known as the qualities of the *deha*. I do not have these. So, there is no possibility of me getting hunger. So I am always satisfied. The other *paatha * is - Because they are *deha dharmaas*, and because of that only, the hunger comes, for me there is no satisfaction also, and there is no hunger also. Meaning that hunger happens to the body only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kshut trushne iti | Bubhukshaa pipaasayoh icchaatvena antahkarana dharmatve   
api deha dharmatva aakhyaa dehastha dhaatu kshayatvaat oupachaarikee | \*   
Ashanaaya pipaase praanasya shoka mohou manasah \* iti shrutou praana   
dharmatva uktih cha praanasya antahkarana kriyaa shaktitvena tat abhedaat |   
Trupti grahanam tu tushti aadeh upa lakshanam |*** Hunger and thirst are basically desires and they are the *dharma * of the *antahkarana * or mind. They are told to be qualities of the body, because the *dhaatus * which are there in the body, when that gets reduced, or is absent, then this happens. So, this is only *upachaara*, just told like that. It is because of the *dhaatus * in the *deha * that this happens, though it is a quality of the mind. It is an *icchaa * of the mind. *Icchaa, **dvesha * happen to the mind. The *Shruti * says that hunger and thirst are for *praana*, and grief and *moha* belong to the mind. The *shruti vaakya * says that hunger and thirst are not for *deha*, but for *praana. Jaraa * and *mrutyu * are *deha dharmaas*. So, this is basically a *kriyaa shakti * of manas only, the *antahkarana * only. *Trupti * is *upalakshana * to *tushti*. 



Page **271** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 





## 22
**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 22:    
Manasah svasthataa tushtih chitta dharmou imou dvija |   
Chetaso yasya tat pruccha pumaan ebhih na yujyate ||*** *Trupti * and *tushti * of the mind, is all the *dharma * of the *chitta*, so go and ask that mind. All these three - *trupti, tushti, svasthataa*, all belong to the mind. So, go and ask the mind, why are you asking me? The *aatman* does not come into contact with this. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Manasa iti | Etat dharma trayam me sadaa asti iti upachaarah | Vastutah tu   
manasa eva svasthataadayo dharmaah | Tasmaat yasya chetasa ime dharmaah   
tat chetah imaan cheto dharmaan pruccha |*** For me, all these *dharmaas * are *oupachaarika vrutti*, secondary sense only. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 23:    
Kva nivaasah tava iti uktam kva gantaasi cha yat tvayaa |   
Kutah cha aagamyate tatra tritaye api nibodha me ||*** You also asked me - "Where do you live?" and "Where are you going?" and also "Where are you coming from?" For all these, listen to me what is the reality. 





## 24
Here, he teaches how *aatman * is different from the body, and how these don't belong to the *aatman*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 24:    
Pumaan sarvagato vyaapee aakaashavat ayam yatah |   
Kutah kutra kva gantaa aaseet etat api arthavat katham ||*** *Jeevaatman * is all pervading. He is present everywhere. Just like the *aakaasha*. Because he travels everywhere, is present everywhere, is all pervading, how can you ask me - "Where are you going", "Where are you coming from". 



*Sarvagata * and *vyaapee * is told for *jeevaatman*. How can it be told for *jeevaatman * who is *anu*? This needs explanation. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Pumaan iti | Na atra pumso gaganavat parama mahatvena gamana aadi   
nishidhyate, tathaa sati sarvagata vyaapi padayoh pounarukhtyaat |*** *Aakaasha * is said to be *parama mahat*, is present everywhere. Because of that, it does not have *gamana*, movement. Just like *aakaasha, aatman * is not meant to be told here as *parama mahat*. That is why *gamana * is not there - this is not the reason. If that had been the case, *sarvagata * and *vyaapee * would not be proper - it would have been *punarukti*, which is not generally done when *svaroopa lakshana * is told. 



*Paramaanu * is the most minute thing, and *parama mahat * is the biggest thing. *Aakaasha * is *parama mahat*. Page **272** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **



*Gamana, aagamana * is not there, not because *jeevaatman * is *parama **mahat * like *aakaasha*. 



***Poorvatra gamana anumatyaa parimitatva abhyupagamaat, sootra virodhaat   
cha na para mahatvam aatmanah |*** Earlier, *gamama * was told, and it is also accepted that he is any *svaroopa*, very subtle. In *Sutra * also, it is told that " *Naanuh atat shruteh iti*". *Poorva paksha * says that *aatman * is not *anu. Shruti * says " *Na cha aananytyaaya kalpate*". When the *jeevaatman svaroopa * is being told, *sootra virodha * will happen if that had been the case. 



*Shruti * tells clearly about *jeevaatman * that *gamana, aagamana*, are very clearly told. And *aatman's * characteristics are told in the Second *Adhyaaya*, *Third Paada*. It is clearly established that *aatman * is *anu svaroopa*. 



It is also told *Vaalaagra shata bhaagasya shatadhaa kalpitasya cha | **Bhaago jeevasya vijnyeyah ... *The same *Shruti * also says " *Sa cha aanantyaaya kalpate*". *Aanantya * is through his *dharma bhoota jnyaana*, and not in *svaroopa*. 



So, there will be *virodha * with *Shruti * and *Sootra * if that is accepted - that it is *parama **mahat*. So, we have to understand that though it is said as *aakaashavat*, it is not because he is *parama mahat*. Other sutraas said - *Upaadaanaat vihaaropadeshaat cha*, he moves around in the body. When he leaves this body also, he goes in *Archiraadi **maarga*, and reaches *Paramaatman *- all these are clearly told in the *Sutras*. So *Sutra **virodha * will also happen if it is told that *aatman * is *parama mahat*. So, that is not the meaning here. ***   
Ayam arthah - sarvagatah - sarvatra deva aadi dehe avasthitah ayam aatmaa,   
vyaapee niravayavatvena ati sookshmatvaat sarva achetana vyaapana sheelah |*** This is the correct meaning. That he can enter into any body, anywhere in the *Prakruti mandala*. There are innumerable, *ananta koti jeevaas * in the *Prakruti **mandala*. They are all in different bodies. So he can be anywhere in any body. This is the meaning of sarvagata. He is present in deva, manushya, krimi, keeta. *Vyaapee * means that is *niravayavi*, part-less, he is extremely subtle in proportion. He can pervade all the *achetanaas*, however *sookshma * the *achetana * is. 



***Atah asya niravayavasya amoortasya cha aakaashaadivat ati soukshmymatvaat   
svato gamana aagamane na bhavatah |*** *Amoorta * means that he cannot be perceived by our *maamsa chakshus*. And he is part-less. *Aakaasha * is also very subtle. By himself, he cannot move and come. Means that Page **273** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **he always needs a *shareera * for movement. 



***Yathaa iha sarvagataanaam amoortaanaam jaati guna aadeenaam svatah kriyaa   
naasti, kintu aashraya dvaaraa deshaantara praaptih |*** *Jaati, guna*, are also present everywhere - *deva, manushya, pashu, pakshi *- so many *jaatis * are there in all the beings. We see *jaati, guna * everywhere. They are all amoorta. *Jaati * cannot move. We cannot separate *guna * from *dravya * in which it is residing. Through the object in which it is residing, movement happens for *jaati, **guna*. Like this, through the object in which it is residing. 



***Evam amoortasya aatmano api deha dvaaraa deshaantara praaptih, yathaa   
savaahanasya pangoh |*** In the same way, *aatman * also is *amoorta*, like a lame person who sits on a vehicle and moves. Just like this, the *jeevaatman * also needs an *aashraya * for movement. He has *deha * as *aashraya*. When he dies, he takes *sookshma shareera * from body to body. Even when he goes to *moksha*, there is *sookshma shareera*. Due to the power of *upaasanaa * or *prapatti*, he gets a special *sookshma shareera * using which he goes in *archiraadi maarga*. So, he needs a *deha * for *aashraya * for movement. ***   
Yathaa uktam poorvatra \* Aham tvam cha tathaa anye cha bhooteruhyaama   
paarthiva | \* Upabhoga nimittam cha sarvatra gamana kriyaa | \* Upabhoga   
nimittam cha deshaat deshaantara aagamah \* ityaadi |*** It was told earlier in this *Vishnu Puraana * itself. *Bharata * told this to the *Souveera **Raaja * in the beginning, when *Souveera Raaja * said that "You are carrying my palanquin, and I am being carried", that "You and I are all being carried by the *pancha bhootaas*". The same questions - "Where are you coming from", "Where are you going", were asked by *Souveera Raja * to *Bharata * also. He had said that a person moved everywhere in order to experience the results of one's *karma * only. *Bhoga * is *karma phala anubhava*. This is the reason why *jeevaatman * moves around in different *dehaas*; for every *karma*, the *phala * is very well decided that in this particular *deha*, in this particular place, *desha*, in this particular time, *kaala*, he will be experiencing this. This is very well decided. In order to experience that, he takes a particular body, goes to a particular place, at a particular time, and experiences the results of *karmaas*. One moves around from place to place to experience the *karma phala*. 



***Evam poorva apara virodhaat ayam eva arthah | Asya tava etat vachah katham   
arthavat iti anvayah |*** So, in order that there is no contradiction between what was taught earlier and what is taught now, this is how the meaning has to be understood. Because of this, how can you ask "Where are you coming from?" , "Where are you going?", etc. Because he can be present in anybody, anywhere, and is all pervading. He resides in a body and can move around anywhere. He is very *sookshma*, can enter into the Page **274** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **minutest *achetana * also. 





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 25:    
So aham gantaa na cha agantaa na eka desha niketanah |   
Tvam cha anye cha na cha tvam cha na anye na eva aham api aham ||*** I am not going anywhere, I did not come from anywhere. I don't have a home in one place. You, me and others and all these are like that only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atah svato me gamana aadi na sambhavati, deha eva gamana aadi kartaa iti   
abhipraayena aaha so aham iti | Yathaa aham na gamana aadi kartaa evam   
tvam cha anye cha aatmanah | Nanu asti hi aham gacchaami iti pratyayah, tatra   
aaha na cha tvam iti | Yah tvayaa gamana aadi kartrutvena abhimato deho na   
sa tvam | Evam uttarayoh | ***So, by myself, I cannot move everywhere. I take resort in a body and move around. Body is moving, and I am not actually moving. I am residing in the body. Just as I am not the doer of this coming, going, etc., in the same way, you and other individual selves are also like that only. One cannot say that "I am going", you also cannot say like that, and others also cannot say like that. What you meant about the movement, coming, going, etc. - you meant the *aatman * itself in your question, but that is not the truth, not reality. You meant the body, when you said "Where did you come from". This applies to you also. He explains the *aatma svaroopa* and answers like this. 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 26:    
Mrushtam na mrushtam iti eshaa jijnyaasaa me krutaa tava |   
Kim vakshyasi iti tatra api shrooyataam dvija sattama || ***Your wanting to know whether I like it or not. I told you that I want *mrushtaanna*, and not *amrushtaanna*. You want to know how did I say that. *Rubhu * is telling to *Nidaagha *- You ask a question about *mrushta, amrushta*, how Can I say that? Let me explain. 



*Jnyaatum icchaa jijnyaasaa. * 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Mrushtam iti | Mrushtam na amrushtam iti cha paathah   
| Mrushtam me deyam na amrushtam iti mayaa abhihite mrushta amrushta   
aadi bhedah svaabhaavikah iti vaa, atha oupaadhika iti kim uttaram ayam   
vakshyati iti tava jijnyaasaa krutaa, na tu tayoh svaabhaavikatva adheeya iti   
arthah | Tatra api - mrushta amrutha vishaye, shrooyataam -   
asvaabhaavikatvam iti bhaavah | ***After he gives *mrushtaanna*, he says that I never had hunger. I did not get satisfied, *trupti * is not there for me. He gives the answer that he is always satisfied. I asked you in the beginning to give me *mrushtaanna*, and not *amrushtaanna*. The Page **275** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **quality of the food - is it *mrushtaanna*, or *amrushtaanna*, is it natural to that? Or is because of some *upaadhi*, adjunct? If I ask this question, what will *Rubhu * answer? is what perhaps you are wanting to know. Not because it is *svaabhaavika*. There also, listen to me means that it is not *svaabhaavika*. It is not natural. 





## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 27:    
Kimasvaadu athavaa mrushtam bhunjato asti dvijottama |   
Mrushtam eva yathaa amrushtam tat eva udvega kaarakam ||*** 





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 28:    
Amrushtam jaayate mrushtam mrushtaat udvijate janah |   
Aadi madhya avasaaneshu kim annam ruchikaarakam || ****Amrushaanna * becomes *mrushta*, and with *mrushtaanna * itself, people are troubled. In this journey where the *jeevaatman * does not have any of these things, which is the *anna * which is tasty to the *aatman*? This is told here. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tat eva aaha - kimasvaadu iti | Kimasvaadvatha iti | Bhunjaanasya kim annam   
niyamenaasvaadu athavaa kimannam mrushtam? Na kim api iti bhaavah | Tat   
eva upapaadayati mrushtam eva iti | Amrushtam eva yadaa yato mrushtam, tat   
mrushtam eva cha udvegakaarakam | Amrushtam iti ekasya ubhaya roopatvam   
asvaabhaavikatve hetuh |*** One who eats - is something very good, or something not good? Does something exist like that? Whatever is *mrushtaanna*, the most enjoyable food, tasty food - that itself will be not enjoyable in some other time, to the same person. So, *mrushtaanna* itself can cause trouble to him. So, it is not natural to the food itself. 



For one who eats, is a food which he does not like, all the time like that? Or is some food, which is enjoyable, always tasty, all the time like that? There is nothing like that, is the meaning. When *amrushtaanna * itself becomes *mrushtaanna*, food which is disliked at some time, itself becomes very tasty, and tasty food itself causes one to be troubled at some other time, and they don't like it, it is said that it is not *svaabhaavika*, not natural to the food itself. One itself is *mrushta*, it itself is *amrushta*, it has got both applicable to the same food. This is why we can infer clearly that it is not natural to the food itself. ***   
Tathaa ahi kshudhi satyaam amrushtam kulmaashaadikam, mrushtam ruchyam   
jaayate | Kshut abhaave mrushtaat samyaava paayasaadeh api udvijate |*** When one is very hungry, even very bad food also will be very tasty. It will feel like *mrushtaanna*. When one is not at all hungry, even if one is given the most tasty *paayasam*, and all the delicacies, it will not be liked, and he will just reject it. 



***Ato bhoktuh avasthaa vashaat annaadeh ruchyatva aruchyatve niyate, ato ***Page **276** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****mrushta amruthsa bhedo na svaabhaavika iti bhaavah |*** Because of the various states of the person who is eating, when the food becomes tasty or not tasty, this is not natural to the food itself. Because it is not always like that. 





## 29
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 29:    
Mrunmayam hi gruham yadvat mrudaa liptam sthiram bhavet |   
Paarthivo ayam tathaa dehah paarthivaih paramaanubhih ||*** The house, which is made of mud, which is smeared all through with mud, becomes steady, and stands firm. It is all *paarthiva * only. In the same way, *deha * is also made up of *paramaanus, paarthiva*, it is also *bhoutika*. 





## 30
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 30:    
Yava godhooma mudgaadi ghrutam tailam payo dadhi |   
Gudam phalaadeeni tathaa paarthivaah paramaanavah ||*** All are *avasthaa visheshaas * of *pruthivi * only, they are all *paarthiva*. All are made up of atoms or *paramaanu*, of *panchabhoota*. Ghee, milk, oil, curd, wheat, jaggery, fruits, are all made of *pancha bhoota, pruthivi*. They are all variations or modifications of *pruthivi * only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tarhi taadruk annam kim tvayaa bhuktam iti aashankya karmaaneetena taadruk   
annena taadruk deha eva sthairyaartham lipyate na aatmaa iti aaha -   
mrunmayam iti |*** Because of *karma * only, that kind of body comes into contact with that kind of a food. In that kind of body, that kind of *aatman * has to eat that kind of food, is all because of the *karma * only. This is being explained, and it is not really connected with *aatman*, is told here. ***   
Yava iti | Bhuktasya yavaadi annasya sthoolo amsho mala mootra bhooto   
nirgacchati; sookshmaamsho maamsa aadi dhaatuh syaat; sookshamataro manah   
poshaka iti dyotayitum paramaanu shabdah | Yathaa cchaandogye \*   
Annamashitam tredhaa vidheeyate ityaadi |*** All the food that is eaten has three aspects, three parts. One is the thick part, fatty part, the *sthoola amsha*. Then is the medium the *sookshma amsha*. And the *sookshma **tara*, the very subtle part of it. The fatty part of the food is sent out of the body through excreta. The *sookshma amsha*, subtle part of it goes into muscle, *maamsa*. The most *sookshma*, most subtle part nurtures the mind. So, food has an effect on the mind, it is told. This is told in the *Upanishads * very clearly. In order to show that, *paramaanu shabda * is used here. 





## 31
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 31:    
Tat etat bhavataa jnyaatvaa mrushta amrushta vichaari yat | ***Page **277** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Tat manah samataa aalambi kaaryam saamyam hi muktaye ||*** Do ponder over *mrushta, amrushta*, whatever I said. Knowing the reality, your mind has to have a *samatva buddhi*, that they are all deha *dharmaas*, they are not *svaabhaavika * for the food. All this happens to a particular person because of the *karma*, and *aatman * is not really associated with all these things. Because of the *karma*, because of the *upaadhi * that he has got a body, that he is enjoying, doing all these things, but they are not in reality the *karmaas * of the *aatman*. 



In all the bodies, it is in the same way. All the *jeevaatmans * in all the bodies are similar. Knowing all these is *samatva*. That will lead you to *moksha*. 



The *saamya, samatvam yoga uchyate *- is told in *Geetha*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Upasamharati tat etat iti | Etat - aatmano deha vyatiriktatva aadikam uktam   
artha jaatam, jnyaatvaa | Mrushta amrushta vichaari iti upalakshanam |   
Mrushtam idam amrushtam idam, devo aham manushyah aham ityaadi karma   
kruta bheda avalambi yat manah tat aatmanaam jnyaana eka aakaaratvena   
samatvaalambi kaaryam | Anusamhitam hi saamyam muktaye bhavati |*** He concludes with this. Whatever is explained, all this, that he is different and distinct from the body, knowing that, ... all these are because of *karma*. But, when the mind thinks that they are all *aatma dharmaas*, then that is not correct; that *bheda * is not there. All these *bheda * that "I am *deva*", "I am *manushya*", "this is *mrushta*", "this is *amrushta*" is not there; all the *aatmans * are of the same essential nature as *jnyaana*, that is what one has to understand, and experience. When one starts experiencing that, that will lead one to *moksha*, is told. ***   


## 32
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 32:    
Braahmanah -   
Iti aakarnya vacah tasya paramaartha aashritam nrupa |   
Pranipatya mahaabhaago nidaagho vaakyam abraveet ||*** *Bharata * tells - Having heard all about this *paramaartha, Nidaagha * pays obeisance and says - 





## 33
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 33:    
Praseeda mat hitaarthaaya katthyataam kah tvam aagatah |   
Nashto mohah tava aakarnya vachaamsi etaani me dvija || ***O *Brahmin*, please do now tell me who are you really \(whether you are my *aachaarya*\). Be pleased with me, and for my good, whatever you told, please reveal your identity. My wrong knowledge is all destroyed. Having listened to your *upadesha*. 





## 34
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 34:  ***Page **278** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Rubhuh -   
Rubhuh asmi tava aachaaryah prajnyaa daanaaya te dvija |   
Iha aagato aham yaasyaami paramaarthah tava uditah || ****Rubhu *- In order to enlighten you, I came. I am your *acharya Rubhu*. I came here all the way to teach you this *paramaartha*. I am going back 





## 35
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 35:    
Evam ekam idam viddhi na bhedi sakalam jagat |   
Vaasudeva abhidheyasya svaroopam paramaatmanah ||*** In this way, know that everything is one. There is no difference, no *bheda * in this entire world. These are all *svaroopa * of *Vaasudeva*, who is the *Paramaatman*. 



*Vishnu Puraana*, right from the beginning is telling about *srushti*, who did it, and these things - from *Vishnu * only. It was told that everything is *Vaasudevaatmaka, Bhagavadaatmaka*, in all the *prakaranaas*. This *na bheda*, which is told here is not *svaroopa aikya*, this is explained clearly below. Words *advaita*, or *abheda * do not mean that it is *svaroopa aikya*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Uktam artham spashtayati - evam iti | Evam ukta prakaarena idam - aatma   
svaroopam jnyaana eka aakaaratvena ekam samam viddhi | Na bhedi deva aadi   
bheda rahitam | Kshut pipaasa aadi rahitam cha viddhi |*** In the way I explained all these things, this *aatma svaroopa *- are all of the same nature of *Jnyaana*, that is why it was told as one, they are all similar. They do not have the differences of the form of *deva, manushya, pashu, pakshi*. Also, know that the *aatmans * do not have thirst or hunger. 



***Anyat cha veditavyam asti | Chetana achetanaatmakam sakalam jagat   
vaasudevasya - \* sarvatra \* Vaasanaat vaasudevasya vaasitam te jagat trayam   
| Sarva bhoota nivaaso asi vaasudeva namostu te || iti evam vaasanaat   
vaasudeva pada abhidheyasya paramaatmanah svaroopam - shareeram viddhi |   
\* Parasya braahmano roopam purushah prathamam dvija \* Taani sarvaani tat   
vapuh \* Tat sarvam vai hareh astu \* Yasya aatmaa shareeram \* ityaadi | Atra   
aatma svaroopa niroopana prakaara nigamane \* Tanmamah samataa aalambi   
kaaryam saamyam hi muktaye \* iti vachanaat \* Evam ekam idam viddhi   
ityaadishu aatmagatam uktam ekatvam jnyaana eka aakaaratayaa samatvam   
eva, na tu svaroopam aikyam iti avagantavyam | Chit achit aatmakasya jagatah   
vaasudeva shareeratva vachanaat aatma paramaatmanah cha abhedo   
maharsheh na abhipretah iti anusandheyam |*** There is also something more which you have to know. All this world made of sentients and non-sentients, *Vaasudeva * is told. *Vaasudeva * is present everywhere, He is living in all three worlds. He is having every being as His place of residence. Because He lives everywhere, He is called *Vaasudeva. Svaroopa * is His *shareera. *Page **279** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) ***Shareera, roopa, vapu, tanu*, are told. It is clearly told that *aatma * is also *shareera * to Him. These are all told very clearly in the *Shrutis. Aatma svaroopa * is being explained here. The concluding part of the *aatma svaroopa*, that mind which thinks that all *aatmans * are equal or similar, that they are all *jnyaana eka aakaara*, all are similar in nature, they only will lead one to *moksha*. Whole world is the *shareera * of *Vaasudeva, Paramaatman*, that also you have to understand as - the *ekatva * which is told with respect to *aatman*, is *jnyaana eka aakaaratayaa **samatvam eva*; is the similarity or equality of all being *jnyaana eka aakaara*. It is not *svaroopa aikya*. This world which is made up of *chit * and *achit*, sentient and non-sentient beings, are all *shareera * of *Vaasudeva*; it was also told that one *dravya * cannot become another *dravya*; so it cannot be *svaroopa aikya*, then *svaroopa naasha * would happen which is not possible. Because of this, the whole world is taken as *shareera*, as told in *Antaryaami Braahmana*, in *Bruhadaaranyakopanishad * in much detail. The whole world is told as *shareera * of *Vaasudeva*; *aatma * and *Paramaatman * are one, is not the *abhipraaya * of *Maharshi Paraasharar * here; so *aikya * is not meant here. 



There is *jeeva - Paramaatma saamya*, because both are *jnyaana svaroopa. **Jeevaatman * is *anu, Paramaatman * is *vibhu*, in *svaroopa * itself. *Jeevaatman * is *anu * in *svaroopa*, but he can be present everywhere, in every body, in every achetana, so he is told to be *sarvagata*. He can pervade everything, can be moving around everywhere. Through *dharma bhoota jnyaana*, in *moksha*, he is all-pervading, *aanantyaaya kalpate*. So, it is not *svaroopa **aikya * between *aatma * and *Paramaatman. Aatma-aatma saamya, aatma-Paramaatma **saamya * are told in *Bhagavad Gita * also. Every *aatman * is of the same nature as *jnyaana **eka aakaara*. So, it is not identity, it is similarity. The *shareera vaachi shabdaas * also denote the *shareeri*. So, " *aham*" can go up to *shareeri * also. So, any name told can also go up to *Paramaatman*. So, every name, and every form - there is a *jeevaatman * and *Paramaatman * also. He is *antaryaami*, present as *aatman * in everything. So, all names and forms can also denote *Paramaatman * in the ultimate analysis, *aparyavasaana vrutti*. 



*Chetana achetana aatmaka jagat * is *Paramaatman's shareera, Vaasudeva shareera*. It is not told that *aatman * and *Paramaatman * are one. 





## 36
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 15, Shloka 36:    
Braahmanah -   
Tathaa iti uktvaa nidaaghena pranipaata purassaram |   
Poojitah parayaa bhaktyaa icchaatah prayayaavrubhuh ||*** *Braahmana - Bharata * concludes the reciting of this story to *Souveera Mahaaraaja. Nidaagha * does *namaskaara * and worships him with great devotion, and *Rubhu * gives him all the *aasheervaadaas*. *Rubhu * went away after having taught him the knowledge. Page **280** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) **



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Dviteeye Amshe Panchadasho Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Dviteeye   
Amshe Panchadasho Adhyaayah ||** *



We have one more Chapter left in this *Amsha*. In Chapter 15, *Mahaayogi Bharata * was reciting the story of *Rubhu * and *Nidaagha * to *Souveera Mahaaraaja*, and he teaches him that *aatma jnyaana * and then leaves that place. After that, again, he comes, visits after a long time, and this is continued in Chapter 16. 



*** ***Page **281** of **297   
**www.sadagopan.org** 



**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****   
|| Atha Shodasho Adhyaayah ||   
Rubhu-Nidaagha Samvaada*** 



Now, Chapter 16. 


