+++
title = "16"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 1:    
Braahmanah -   
Rubhuh varsha sahasre tu samateete nareshvara |   
Nidaagha jnyaana daanaaya tat eva nagaram yayou ||*** *Bharata *\(to *Souveera Mahaaraaja*\) - After one thousand years, *Rubhu* again comes back. In order to teach him, do the complete *upadesha* of *Aatma jnyaana*, he comes back to the same place. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Uktasya aatma saamyasya darshanam chira kaala yoga saadhyam iti   
uttaraadhyaayena uchyate - rubhuh ityaadinaa | ***After thousand years, he comes back. Why does he come back? *Rubhu* knew that whatever he had taught to *Nidaagha*, takes a long time to put to practice. That *jnyaana* has to come through *anushthaana*. It is a difficult thing and takes a long time. One has to be practicing this yoga for a long time. Then only, they can reach the perfection of *aatma saamya darshana*. So, he comes back after a thousand years. This also shows the compassion of the *aachaarya*, that they do not leave the *shishyaas* half way through. They teach and make sure that the *jnyaana* is brought to *anusthanaa*. They themselves come and teach. 





## 2
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 2:    
Nagarasya bahih so atha nidaagham dadrushe munih |   
Mahaabala pareevaare puram vishati paarthive || ***When he came, outside the city, he saw *Nidaagha*. At the same time, *Paarthiva*, the king was entering the city, with all his force and his *parivaara*. 





## 3
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 3:    
Doore sthitam mahaabhaagam jana sammarda varjakam |   
Kshut kshaama kantham aayaantam aranyaat sa samit kusham || ****Nidaagha* wanted to avoid the crowd, and so was standing at a distance alone. He had gone to the forest to collect *samit* and *darbha*; having collected all that, he was hungry and thirsty. He was waiting for the crowd to pass, and did not want to get mixed up in the crowd. He was standing alone at a distance. 



[[282]]   
**www.sadagopan.org** 





## 4
**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 4:    
Drushtvaa nidaagham sa rubhuh upagamya abhivaadya cha |   
Uvaacha kasmaat ekaante stheeyate bhavataa dvija ||*** *Rubhu* saw *Nidaagha* at a distance, and goes near *Nidaagha* and does *abhivaadana*. "Why are you standing alone at a distance, O *Brahmin*", he asked him. 



This *Rubhu* does in order for *Nidaagha* not to realize who he was. *Nidaagha* would think that he is some *brahmin*, who has come there, not being able to recognize him. ***   


## 5
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 5:    
Nidaaghah -   
Bho vipra jana sammardo mahaan esha nareshvarah |   
Pravivikshuh puram ramyam tena atra stheeyate mayaa ||*** *Nidaagha *- O *Brahmin*, this king is followed by a huge crowd, and is wanting to enter the city with his huge crowd. That is why I am standing here, so that they can all pass, so that I can avoid this crowd. 



*Pravetum icchuh pravivikshuh *- desirous of entering \(the city\). ***   


## 6
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 6:    
Rubhuh -   
Naraadhipah atra katamah katamah cha itaro janah |   
Kathyataam me dvija shreshtha tvam abhijnyo mato mama ||*** *Rubhu *- Who is the king and who are the other people? Please do tell me, I think you are knowledgeable about that. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Naraadhipa iti | Naraadhipah atra katama iti | Na ekasmin api aatmani   
naraadhipatva aadi visheshanam pashyaami iti bhaavah | ****Rubhu* was actually hinting that he is seeing only *aatmans* everywhere, because he had that *aatma darshana*. He did not differentiate between king and another person. He was not seeing those external forms. He had realized the *aatman*. So, he was not able to see the *naraadhipatva* and other attributes in these *aatmans*. He saw *aatmans* as *jnyaana eka aakaaraas*. "I am not able to see any attributes in these *aatmans* like *naraadhipatva, jaati*, position, etc." 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 7:    
Nidaaghah -   
Yo ayam gajendram unmattam adri shrunga samucchritam |   
Adhiroodho narendro ayam parilokah tathaa itarah || ****Nidaagha *- This huge elephant which is big like a peak of a mountain, one who is sitting on that - he is the king and all the other people are his *parivaara* who are following him. [[283]]   




***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bhaava aparijnyaanaat aaha yo ayam iti | Parilokah - parijanah | ****Rubhu* had said that he is seeing *aatmans* only, and is not seeing the *naraadipatva*, and other things. He is not able to understand that. So, *Nidaagha* starts to explain in an innocent way as though the *Brahmin* who is asking the question does not know that the person sitting on the elephant is the king and all the people are his *parivaara*. So, he explains like that. ***   


## 8
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 8:    
Rubhuh -   
Etou hi gajaraajaanou yugapat darshitou mama |   
Bhavataa na visheshena pruthak chinha upalakshanou ||*** *Rubhu *- You showed me both together. You said that one who is sitting on the elephant is the king, and others surrounding him are the others. You just said that he is this, and others are that. At the same time you should me both. But you did not give the specific characteristics of each. You did not tell me clearly the specific characteristics of king and others - their distinguishing marks. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Etou hi iti | Ayam ayam iti hastamudrayaa etou darshitou | Na mayaa gajatvena   
raajatvena cha etou aatmanou drushtou | Aham tu nirvaana jnyaanamayou etou   
pashyaami iti bhaavah | ***You showed with your hand that this is the king, and these are the other people. I did not see that this is *gaja* or this is *raajaa*. I am seeing only them as *jnyaana aananda **svaroopaas*, is the *bhaava*. 





## 9
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 9:    
Tat kathyataam mahaabhaaga vishesho bhavataa anayoh |   
Jnyaatum icchaami aham ko atra gajah ko vaa naraadhipah || ***Please do tell me, O *Brahmin*, the distinguishing characteristics of these two. You said king is sitting on the elephant. Who is the elephant and who is the king? Please do tell me. ***   


## 10
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 10:    
Nidaaghah -   
Gajo yo ayam adho brahman upari yasya esha bhoopatih |   
Vaahya vaahaka sambandham ko na jaanaati vai dvija ||*** *Nidaagha *- O *Brahmin*, are you not able to understand even this much? The elephant is below, and one who is sitting on the top is the king. There is *vaahya vaahaka **sambandha *- one who is being carried and one who is carrying. The elephant is carrying the king; elephant is below and king is on top. Who does not know this? 



[[284]]   
**www.sadagopan.org** 





## 11
**SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 11:    
Rubhuh -   
Jaanaami aham yathaa brahman tathaa maam avabodhaya |   
Adhah shabda nigadyam kim kim cha oordhvam abhidheeyate || ****Rubhu *- I am not able to know this, understand this. Please teach me so that I am able to understand this. What did you mean by below and above? What is the actual meaning of below and above? Please teach me so that I am able to understand clearly. What is said to be on top, and what is said to be below? 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 12:    
Braahmanah -   
Iti uktah sahasaa aaruhya nidaaghah praaha tam rubhum |   
Shrooyataa kathayaame esha yat maam pariprucchasi || ****Bharata *- Immediately, *Nidaagha* climbs up on a stone, a platform, and stands on that and tells *Rubhu *- "I am going to show you with an illustration". ***   


## 13
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 13:    
Upari aham yathaa raajaa tvam adhah kunjaro yathaa |   
Avabodhaaya te brahman drushtaanto darshito mayaa ||*** O *Brahmin*, you are *shreshta*, I am showing you only in order to teach you, not to disrespect you. I am standing above, just like the king, and you are below, just like the elephant. I am telling only in order to teach you. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Upari iti | Aarohana kriyayaa eva uttaram darshayan tat atikrama dosham   
pariharati drushtaanta iti | ***By the act of climbing up, he showed him the answer. The *Brahmin* is very respectable. Looks like he showed disrespect, for this he is telling, I am only giving you an example, and not showing you disrespect. ***   


## 14
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 14:    
Rubhuh -   
Tvam raajaa eva dvija shreshtha sthito aham gajavat yadi |   
Tat eva tvam mamaachakshva katamah tvam aham tathaa ||*** *Rubhu *- If you are like king, if I am standing like the elephant, now you please explain me "Who are you and who am I". 



So he leads him to the *aham, tvam*; so that the *aham artha* is what he is going to teach. Who is *tvam*, and who is *aham*? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tvam iti | Katamah tvam aham tathaa iti aatmano deha roopa bheda aakshepah   
| Tvam aham shabdayoh artho dehaat vilakshana iti bhaavah | [[285]]   
The difference is only in the form of the body; individual selves do not have this kind of difference; you are telling "You and I", possibly keeping in mind the form of the body. The actual meaning of *tvam* and *aham* is the *aatman* who is very different and distinct from the body. ***   


## 15
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 15:    
Braahmanah -   
Iti uktah satvaram tasya pragruhya charanou ubhou |   
Nidaaghah tu aaha bhagavaan aachaaryah tvam rubhuh dhruvam ||*** *Bharata *- Immediately *Nidaagha* realized. He falls at his feet, and holds both his feet. "O *brahmin*, you are definitely my *aachaarya Rubhu* only, I have no doubt about this". ***   


## 16
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 16:    
Na anyasya advaita samskaara samskrutam maanasam tathaa |   
Yathaa aachaaryasya tena tvaam manye praaptam aham gurum ||*** I do not think anyone else has this kind of *aatma jnyaana*, as good as my *aachaarya **Rubhu*. I am very sure that my *aachaarya* only has come here, in order to teach me. This kind of mindset of realizing *aatman* everywhere, has realized the *aatman*. This is not possible for anyone else, as my *aachaarya Rubhu*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na anyasya iti | Advaitam deva aadi dvaita raahityam | ****Advaita* means that the *deva, manushya*, etc. - this kind of *dvaita* is not there. Perceiving the individual self as *aatman* in all the bodies. ***   


## 17
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 17:    
Rubhuh -   
Tava upadesha daanaaya poorva shushrooshana aadrutah |   
Guru snehaat rubhuh naama nidaagha samupaagatah ||*** *Rubhu *- In order to teach you only, in order to do this *upadesha* only, I was very happy with the desire you had in order to attain this *aatma jnyaana*; I have come because of that. *Aachaaryaas* love their *shishyaas* so much, "Because of that, I am your *aachaarya* and am very compassionate towards you, looking at your desire and your *shraddhaa* in order to attain that *aatma jnyaana*, I have come to you, *Nidaagha*". 



*Shrotum icchaa shushrooshaa. * 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tava iti | Shushrooshanaadrutah shushrooshanena aadrutavaan |   
Shushrooshooshanaahrutah iti paathe shushrooshanena vasheekrutah | Aadruta   
iti kartari roopam | ***Looking at the desire to realize this *aatma jnyaana*, I am captivated by that *icchaa*, desire you have. This is the other *paathaantara*. [[286]]   
***   


## 18
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 18:    
Tat etat upadishtam te samkshepena mahaamate |   
Paraartha saarabhootam yat tat advaitam asheshatah ||*** That is what I have taught you again, very briefly. That which is the essence of all knowledge, that *advaita jnyaana*, that all *aatmans* are *jnyaana svaroopa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***** *****Tat etat iti | Tat tasmaat, advaitam deva aadi bheda rahitam jnyaana eka   
aakaaram tat etat aatma svaroopam adya samkshepena upadishtam |***** **That which is devoid of, or that which does not have difference of the nature of *deva, **manushya*, and all these forms, and is uniform everywhere, all the *aatmans* are *jnyaana eka aakaara*, all of the essential nature of consciousness. In order to teach that only. I have taught you very briefly. here. ***   


## 19
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 19:    
Braahmanah -   
Evam uktvaa yayou vidvaan nidaagham sa rubhuh guruh |   
Nidaagho api upadeshena tena advaita paro abhavat ||*** *Bharata *- Then *aachaarya Rubhu* goes away, having taught his disciple briefly. After this teaching, even *Nidaagha* also realized the *aatma jnyaana*. ***   


## 20
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 20:    
Sarva bhootaani abhedena dadarsha sa tadaa aatmanah |   
Tathaa brahma paro muktim avaapa paramaam dvijah ||*** He saw all beings without any difference or distinction, with respect of the body, etc. As one's self, *jnyaana aakaara*, he saw every being as *jnyaanaikaakaara*. Then he attained *mukti* after having realized the Brahman. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sarva bhootaani iti | Sarva bhootaani sarvaan aatmanah, sura naratva aadi   
bheda raahityena sva aatmanah abhedena samatvena apashyat; na tu ekatvena,   
tathaa sati sarva bhootaani aatmana iti \(pada vaiyarthyaprasangah\) |   
Praatipaadikaat vibhakti vaiyarthya prasangah | Tathaa brahma abhedena   
taadaatmyena apashyat | \* Aatmaa iti tu upagacchanti graahayanti cha iti   
sootraat |*** *Samatva* is *aatma aatma saamya*. He realized that all *aatmans* are of the same essential nature. He did not realize that there is only one *aatman*, he did not realize like that, because there will be lot of contradictions in this *upadesha*. The *sarva **bhootaani* itself would not make sense in this case. *Brahman* is the self of all the *aatmans*, he saw that *jeevaatman* is also *shareera* of *Brahman*. He realized in that way. This is how one does *upaasanaa*, is told in the *Brahma Sutra*, in Chapter 4, where *Baadaraayana* says that " *Aatma iti tu upagacchanti*", that they all [[287]]   
do *upaasanaa* thinking that *Paramaatman* is the *aatman*. This is how *Shruti* also teaches them. 



*Shruti* declares very clearly that *Bhagavaan* is *aatma* of everything and even *jeevaatmans*. In *Bruhadaaranyaka Shruti*, it is clearly told that " *Yah aatmani **tishthan aatmaanam antaro, yam aatmaa na veda, yasya aatmaa shareeram, yah **aatmaanam antaro yamayati, sa aatmaa antaryaami amrutah*". So, he says that he is *aatma* to you also. He is in all the *aatmans*, and all *aatmans* are his *shareera*. He is *antaryaami*, is taught in the *Shrutis*. This is how one has to do *upaasanaa*, that *Bhagavaan* is our *aatman*. 



Samatvam yoga uchyate. 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 21:    
Tathaa tvam api dharmajnya tulya aatma ripu baandhavah |   
Bhava sarvagatam jaanan aatmaanam avaneepate || ***O *Souveera Raajaa*, you are one who is knowledgeable about *dharma*, you are *dharmajnya*; you should see equally yourself, your relatives and all your enemies. You should treat all of them equally as all are *jnyaanaikaakaara*. Realizing the *aatman* who is there in all the bodies, you can actually understand that. Do realize that *aatman* everywhere, in all the bodies. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tathaa iti | Sarvagatam - tat tat karma anugunyena tat tat deva aadi deha   
gatam aatma tatvam, ukta prakaaram jaanan tulya aatma ripu baandhavo   
bhava |*** *Aatma svaroopa* is *anu* only - this is clearly told in the *Shrutis*. This *sarvagatatva* is there in various bodies depending on the karma. In order to experience the fruits of the *karma*, he gets different bodies. Whether it is *deva, manushya, pashu, pakshi*, the *aatman* attains those bodies. The *aatman* which is there in all bodies, that is *sarvagata*. Once you realize this, then you will treat everyone equally. 



This is also told as the *lakshana* of a *Vaishnava*, a *prapanna*, that *aatma-suhrut-**vipaksha pakshe sama matih*. ***   


## 22
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 22:    
Sita neela aadi bhedena yathaa ekam drushyate nabhah |   
Bhraanta drushtibhih aatmaa api tathaa ekah san pruthak pruthak ||*** The *aakaasha*, sky is one only, but it gets different colours at different places; in one place, it is white, at another place, it is blackish blue. They see this as a different thing and that as a different thing. But sky is only one. *Aatma* also who is one, being *jnyaanaikaakaara*, he is seen differently as the body, thinking that the body itself is *aatman*, by those who do not have the correct knowledge. [[288]]   
***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sita neela iti | Ekah san jnyaana eka aakarena eka roopah san, deva aadi deha   
praveshaat tat tat roopena bhraantyaa pruthak pruthak drushyate |*** It is *eka roopa* only, it is similarity, and not identity. It is not one, but many of the same nature. When *aatman* is present in various bodies, he is seen as the body itself, as different by those who do not have the right knowledge. 





## 23
This *shloka* is explained in *Sri Bhaashya* in great detail. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 23:    
Ekah samastam yat iha asti kinchit tat achyuto na asti param tato anyat |   
So aham sa cha tvam sa cha sarvam etat aatma svaroopam tyaja bheda moham   
||*** Whatever is there, everything is one only. It is *Achyuta*, nothing other than that. Everything that is here is all *Achyuta* only. I am also *Achyuta* only, and you are also that only. All these things are only *aatma svaroopa*. You have to see everything as *eka **aakaara*, and not see the differences, the wrong perception, the *bheda moha* in the body itself and seeing difference in these things. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha \* Sakalam jagat vaasudeva abhidheyasya svaroopam paramaatmanah iti   
poorva adhyaaya uktam sarvasya bhagavat aatmakatvam nigamayati eka iti |*** In the previous chapter, it was told that everything is *Vaasudeva Svaroopa*, is His *shareera*. In so many places, it is told very clearly that everything is *Bhagavadaatmaka*. This is concluded here. 



***Yat iha asti kinchit tat samastam eko achyuta eva - tat aatmakam iti arthah |*** This is like *Sarvam khalvidam brahma* - if there is only *Brahma*, then *sarvam* has no meaning. *Eka vijnyaanena sarva vijnyaanam *- if *eka*, it is only one, then *sarva* becomes *mithyaa*, and there is no meaning in telling *sarva vijnyaana*. The meaning is that everything is *Bhagavadaatmaka*. Whatever is there here, that is only one *Achyuta*. Everything is *Bhagavadaatmaka*, having Him as *antaryaami*. 



***Tasmaat tatah param utkrushtam, anyat vyatiriktam cha na asti, tato anyat   
utkrushtam na asti iti vaa |*** Anything superior to Him, there is nothing. Other than Him, there is nothing. There is nothing which is superior to Him also. 



***Sarva aatmanaam poorva uktam jnyaana eka aakaaram tat shabdena   
paraamrushya tat saamaanaadhikaranyena aham tvam aadeenaam arthaanaam   
jnyaanam eva aakaara iti upasamharan deva aadi aakaara bhedena aatmasu   
bhedamoham parityaja iti aaha so aham iti |*** Whatever was told earlier that all the *aatmans* are *jnyaana* only, that is told with the [[289]]   
word *tat*, that *tat* is *aatman. Aham, tvam*, etc. are told in *saamaanaadhikaranya*, in the same *vibhakti*. There are multiple words which qualify the same object - multiple attributes qualifying the same object. There is no *paraspara virodha* among these attributes. They can actually qualify the same object - this is *saamaanaadhikaranya. **Bhinna pravrutti nimittaanaam shabdaanaam ekasmin arthe vruttih **saamaanaadhikaranyam*. Here, the words *tat, aham, tvam *- are all told. They are all qualifying the same object, *aatman*, which is *jnyaanaikaakaara*. The *aatmans* are different in each. *Tvam* means the *aatman* who is in you. *Aham* means the *aatman* who is in me. Object is *aatman*, but *jnyaanaikaakaara* is what is meant here. The forms of all these are *jnyaanaikaakaara* only. Don't have the wrong understanding that *aatmans* are different. Because of the form of the external appearance that you see, *deva, manushya*, but inside, all are of the similar essential nature. 



***Na tu atra aatmaanam svaroopa bhedo nishidhyate | Tathaa sati deha atirikta   
upadeshasya svaroope aham aham tvam sarvam etat aatma svaroopam iti bheda   
nirdesho na ghatate | ***It is not telling that there is no *bheda* in the *svaroopa* of the *aatman*. But, what is told here is the *aatma svaroopa* which is different and distinct from the body, is what is taught here. *Aham, tvam, sarvam*, would not have made sense if that was not the case. Because the bodies are all different. Appearances are different but *jeevaatman* inside has the same form. *Aham, tvam, sarvam etat*, this *bheda* would not have been possible. 



***Deha aatma viveka vishayam cha ayam upadeshah | Kutah? \* Pindah pruthak   
yatah pumsah shirah paani aadi lakshanah iti prakramaat |*** This *upadesha* is primarily in order to teach the differentiating characteristics of *deha* and *aatman*, that *aatman* is different and distinct from the body. This *viveka **jnyaana* is the purpose of this *prakarana*. How do we say this? *Aatman* is different from body. *Aatman* is different from *indriyaas, aatman* is different from the *manas*, one by one, he teaches. The gist of this is *deha aatma viveka*. What is being taught is that *aatman* is different from the body. This is how the *upadesha* started. Body which is having the head, hand, etc. is different from the *aatman*. ***   


## 24
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 24:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Iteeritah tena sa raaja varyah tatyaaja bhedam paramaartha drushtih |   
Sa chaapi jaati smaranana aapta bodhah tatra eva janmani apavargam aapa ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- Having realized the *paramaartha* that all *aatmans* are of the same *jnyaana svaroopa*, they are all *jnyaanaikaakaara* and are all similar in their essential nature, the *Souveera Raaja* realized the *jnyaanaikaakaara* of all the *aatmans. Bharata muni* also, who had *jaati smarana*, who remembered who he was in his previous birth, also attained *moksha* in the same *janma*. [[290]]   
***   


## 25
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 2, Chapter 16, Shloka 25:    
Iti bharata narendra saara vruttam kathayati yah cha shrunoti bhakti yuktah |   
Sa vimalamatireti na aatma moham bhavati cha samsaraneshu mukti yogyah ||*** One who, with great devotion, either tells this, or listens to this story, the gist of this *upadesha*, that the *mahaa yogi Bharata* told to *Souveera Mahaaraaja*, his mind becomes purified and he will not have the *moha*, wrong knowledge of the nature of *aatman* being the body. He becomes eligible for liberation among the embodied souls. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Iti iti | Saara vruttam saarabhootam vruttam | Samsaraneshu aatma moham na   
iti, mukti yogyah mukti saamraajya yogyah cha bhavati iti anvayah |*** Those who are in this *samsaara*, he will realize the *aatman* here itself, he will see *jnyaanaikaakaara* everywhere, that the body is different from *aatman*. He becomes eligible to go to *moksha*. 



This concludes the *Amsha* 2, Chapter 16. 



*|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Dviteeye Amshe Shodasho Adhyaayah ||** **|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Dviteeye Amshe Shodasho **Adhyaayah || *



This concludes Amsha 2. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Dviteeyah Amshah Samaaptah ||*** 





[[291]]   
**www.sadagopan.org** 





Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 Sincere thanks to: SrI Nrsimha Seva Rasikan, Oppiliappan Koil SrI V.Sadagopan SvAmi for hosting this title in his website, sadagopan.org Cover Picture: Sri Prahalada Varadan with Nachimars, Sri Ahobilam Cover Design and eBook assembly by: Sri Murali Desikachari Released on: Sarvari Varusham, Aippasi Swathi, Deepavali Dinam \(14th November, 2020\) www.sadagopan.org



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 **Sri Vishnu Puraana ****Classes conducted online by ****Sri A Narasimhan****Notes prepared by Dr Amarnath ****Organized by Sri Tirunarayana Trust in memory of ****Mahavidvaan U Ve Sri V T Tirunarayana Iyengar Swamy ***\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\** *Sri Tirunarayana Trust, ShanbagaDhama-Yaduvanam* *Villa 16, Brigade PalmGrove,Bogadi Road **Mysuru 570026. India. **Tel:91-97311 09114 **Trust Website: www.tirunarayana.in* *Sri Vishnu Purana Class Notes: **https://groups.google.com/forum/\





Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 **|| Atha Triteeyah Amshah ||** Now the Third *Amsha*, out of the Six *Amshaas*. **|| Atha Prathamo Adhyaayah || ****Manvantaraas** Now, the First Chapter. *Maitreyar* tells *Paraasharar* about what all was taught, and also requests what he would like to know. 