+++
title = "01"

+++


## 1

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 1:    
Maitreyah -   
Bhagavan yat naraih kaaryam saadhu karmani avasthitaih |   
Tat mahyam gurunaa aakhyaatam nitya naimittikaatmakam || 
_____
*Maitreyar *– Those who are established in *saadhu karma, vaidika karmaas*, whatever one has to do, that you told me in great detail. *Nitya* and *Naimittika karmaas* which are very much required, by those who are following the *vaidika dharmaas*, you told me about them. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Truteeye amshe bhagavatah sthiti hetu bhoota manvaadi roopa   
bhedaanaam adhikaara bhedah uktah | Visheshatah cha jagatah sthiti   
hetuh varna aashrama dharmah sadaachaarah cha uktah | Chaturthe   
amshe tu tat sthaapaka dhaarmika soma soorya udbhava kshatra   


## 2
vamshah tat anucharitam cha uchyate | 
_____
In the Third *Amsha*, in order to take care of the sustenance of this world, *Manus, Manvantaraas* were all told; the differences in their *adhikaara* was also told; various *Manus, Manvantaraas, **vamshaas* of *devaas*, were all told. Especially with great detail, that which causes the sustenance of the world, that on which the world sustains, was told, which is nothing but *varna aashrama dharma*, and *sadaachaara*. It is made very clear that the world stands on these. If the *varna aashrama* [[1]] of 249 www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 *dharmaas* are followed, then the world will be peaceful, and sustenance happens in a nice way. Similarly *sadaachaara*. This was explained. In the Fourth *Amsha*, those who established this *varna aashrama dharma*, details of those *vamshaas* are going to be told. The *Soma, Soorya vamsha*, will all betold. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 2:    
Varna dharmaah tathaa aakhyaataa   
dharmaa ye cha aashrameshu cha |   
Shrotum icchaami aham vamsham   


## 3
raajnyaam tat broohi me guro || 
_____
Also the *varna dharmaas* were told - *aashrama dharmaas* were also told in detail by you. I am interested in listening to the *vamsha* of all the kings, who established all these things. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 3:    
Sri Paraasharah   
 -   
Maitreya shrooyataam ayam aneka yajva shoora veera dheera   
bhoopaala alankruto brahmaadih maanavo vamshah || 
_____
*Sri Paraasharar *- *Manu vamsha*, I am going to tell starting from *Chaturmukha Brahma*, to all the *Manus*, it is decorated by such great kings, who were performing a lot of *yaagaas*, who were very valiant, and powerful. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Maitreya iti | Veerah utsaahee | Shoorah paraabhibhaavee |   


## 4
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 4:  
_____
 [[2]] of 249 www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4
_____
 Tat asya vamshasya anupoorveem ashesha paapa prakshaalanaaya   
maitreya etaam shrunu ||   


## 5
 
_____
 What is the purpose of this, all your sins will get destroyed because it is such a *dhaarmika vamsha*. Even listening to it will wash away all our sins. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 5:    
 Sakala jagataam aadih anaadi bhootah sa rik yajus saama aadimayo   
bhagavaan vishnuh | Tasya brahmano moortam svaroopam   
hiranyagarbhaakhyo bhramaanda bhooto bhagavaan brahmaa vai   
praak babhoova ||   


## 6
 
_____
*Bhagavaan Vishnu* is the sole creator of this whole world. He is beginningless. He is *Ringmaya, Yajurmaya, Saamaveda maya, Bhagavaan **Vishnu*. He is praised by the *Vedaas*, He is established in the *Vedaas*. Every word of the *Vedaas* is telling about Him only. He is that *Brahmaa's moorta **svaroopa*, that which is manifested. He is called *Hiranyagarbha*, and is the whole *Brahmaanda* itself. He is *Chaturmukha Brahma* who was born first. He is the first *chetana* in the *Brahmaanda*, called *Hiranyagarbha*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 6:    
 Brahmanah cha dakshina angushtha janmaa dakshah prajaapatih |   
Dakshasya api aditih aditeh vivasvaan vivasvato manuh || 
_____
From *Chaturmukha Brahma's* right thumb, *Daksha Prajaapati* was born. From *Daksha, Aditi* was born. From *Aditi, Vivasvaan*, and from *Vivasvaan, **Manu* was born. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
 Braahmana iti | \* Aditih hi aja nishta dakshayaa duhitaa tava taam   
devaa anu ajaayanta \* ityaadi shruti sammatatvaat brahma dakshaadi   
kramah uktah | Na tu brahma mareechi aadih |   
 
_____
 The *Brahma Daksha krama* is told. Not *Brahma* and *Mareechi*.  [[3]] of 249 





## 7
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 7:    
 Manoh ikshvaaku nruga dhrushta sharyaati narishyanta naabhaaga   
dishta karoosha prushadhyaakhyaa nava putraa babhoovuh |   
 
_____
 Manu had nine sons. They are *Iskhvaaku, Nruga, Drushta, Sharyaati, **Narishyanta, Naabhaaga, Dishta, Karoosha* and *Prushadhra*. 





## 8

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 8:    
 Ishtim cha mitraa varunayoh manuh putrakaamah chakaara || 
_____
With the desire to beget sons, he performed *yaaga **Ishti* for *Mitra* and *Varuna*. 




_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ishtim cha iti | Ikshvaaku aadi putra utpatteh poorvam ishtim   
chakaara | Tasmaat iskvaaku aadi utpatteh praak ilaa janma, \*   
Akarot putra kaamah tu munih ishtim prajaapatih || Anutpanneshu   
navasu punneshu eteshu suvrata || \* iti vaayu ukteh | 
_____




*Manu* performed the *Ishti* first, and then got all the sons. *Ilaa* was born first, and then the nine sons were born. This is the order which we have to understand, though in the *paatha krama*, it is different. The *Vaayu **Puraana pramaana* is being told. 





## 9

_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 9:    
 Tatra taavat apahnute hotuh apachaaraadilaa naama kanyaa   
babhoova ||   
 
_____
 He did *Putrakaameshti* for *Mitra, Varuna*; there was a mistake by the *hotru* during the *yaaga*. Because of the mistake they did, instead of  [[4]] of 249 





## 10
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 getting a son, he got a daughter, by name *Ilaa*. After that, the sons were born. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 10:    
 Saiva cha mitraavarunayoh prasaadaat sudyumno naama manoh putro   


## 11
maitreya aaseet | 
_____
Then he worshipped *Mitra* and *Varuna*, and with their *prasaada, Ilaa* who was born as a daughter, she got turned into a male by name *Sudyumna*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 11:    
 Punah cha eeshvara kopaat stree satee saa tu soma soonoh budhasya   


## 12
aashrama sameepe babhraama || 
_____
Again that *Sudyumna* was roaming around in *Kailaasa* where *Eeshvara* was in *ekaanta*; there is a saying that whoever comes when they are in *ekaanta* will turn into a woman. So, he again turned into a woman. Near the *Budha's aashrama*, he was roaming around, after becoming a woman. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 12:    
 Saanuraagah cha tasyaam budhah puroorava sama aatmajam   
utpaadayaamaasa ||   
 **Budha* got interested in her, and he got a son *Pururavas*. The story continues that he becomes *Sudyumna* again by the grace of the Lord. We will see these next. We are studying *Amsha* 4, Chapter 1, where *Maitreyar* asks *Paraasharar *that he would like to know more about the *Kshatriya vamshaas*, the v *amsha **anucharita*, and *Paraasharar* is starting to tell these details. He tells that *Manu* did a *Putrakameshti yaaga*, where the *hotru* made a mistake, and because of this, instead of a son, a *daughter* was born by name *Ilaa*. He did the *Putrakaameshti yaaga* to please gods *Mitra* and *Varuna*, and with their grace, *Ilaa* became a son, by name *Sudyumna*. This *Sudyumna*, while roaming around *Eeshvara's* place, because of *Eeshvara's shaapa*, he again turned into a woman. He was roaming around *Budha's aashrama*, where  [[5]] of 249 





## 13
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 *Budha* is the son of *Soma*. *Budha* got interested in her, and had a son by name *Pururavas*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 13:    
 Jaate cha tasmin amita tejobhih parmarshibhih ishtimaya rungmayo   
yajurmayah saamamayo atharvanamayah sarvamayo manomayo   
jnyaanamayo vijnyaanamayo annamayo amrutamayo na kinchit mayo   
bhagavaan yajnya purusha svaroopee sudyumnasya pumstvam   
abhilashadbhih yathaavat ishtah tat prasaadaat ilaa punarapi   
sudyumno abhavat |   
 
_____
 Due to *Eeshvara's shaapa, Sudyumna* had again turned into *Ilaa*. After that, *Yajnyapurusha, Mahaavishnu* was again worshipped, with the *ishti*, with the desire to make *Ilaa* again into a man. The attributes of the *Yajnyapurusha* are told here, as *Rungmaya, Yajurmaya, Saamamaya*. He is the one praised by all the *Vedaas*. All the *Vedic shabdaas* are telling *Paramaatman* only. This is told also as *Atharvanamaya, Sarvamaya, **Manomaya \(parishuddha mano graahyah\), Jnyaanamaya, Vijnyaanamaya, **Annamaya, Amrutamaya. Na kinchit maya* means that He did not have any *jnyaana sankocha* like *deva* and others, who were all *karma vashyaas, **kshetrajnyaas* only. Because He is the Supreme *yajnya purusha Bhagavaan*. The *rishis* desired and performed the *ishti*. They wanted *Ilaa* to become a man, desiring the manhood of *Sudyumna*. With His grace, *Ilaa* again became *Sudyumna*. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
 Jaate cha iti | Na kinchit mayah - karma kruta devaaadi roopa tat   
kruta jnyaana sankochaadi rahitah |   


## 14
 
_____
 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 14:    
 Tasya api utkala gaya vinataah trayah putraah babhoovuh |   


## 15
 
_____
 Then, *Sudyumna* had three sons, *Utkala, Gaya, Vinata*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 15:    
 Sudyumnah tu stree poorvatvaat raajyabhaagam na lebhe |
_____
 [[6]] of 249 





## 16
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4
_____
 **Sudyumna*, because he was born as *Ilaa*, he did not get any part in the kingdom of his father. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 16:    
 Tat pitraa tu vasishtha vachanaat pratishthaanam naam nagaram   
sudyumnaaya dattam tat cha asou purooravase praadaat |   


## 17
 **Vasishta* told *Manu* that he can give *Sudyumna* the city of *Pratishthaana*, and this city was given. This, *Sudyumna* gave it to his son *Pururavas*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 17:    
 \[Tat anvayaah cha kshatriyaah sarve dikshu abhavan |\] Prushadhrah   
tu manuputro guru go vadhaat shoodratvam agamat |   
 
_____
 All the sons, those related to him became *kshatriyaas*, and were present in all directions. *Prushadhra*, son of *Manu*, one of the nine sons of *Manu*; he killed a cow belonging to his guru, and because of that, he became a *shoodra*. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
 Prushadhra iti | Soochee kathaaha naayena alpatvaat prathamam   
prushadhraadi vamsha uktih | Balandhana utpatteh pashchaat   


## 18
naabhaagasya vaishyatva praaptih |
_____
 This is a small *vamsha*, and because of this, it is told first. *Prushadhra* is the last son of *Manu. Naabhaaga* had a son *Balandhana*, and then *Naabhaaga* became a *vaishya*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 18:    
 Manoh putrah karushah karushaat karushaah kshatriyaa mahaa bala   


## 19
paraakramaa babhoovuh | 
_____
Manu's son is Karoosha. Karoosha's children are Kaarooshaas. They are all Kshatriyaas; they had great valour, very valiant warriors. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 19:  
_____
 [[7]] of 249 



www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4
_____
 Dishta putrah tu naabhaago vaishyataam agamat tasmaat   
balanghanah putro abhavat |   


## 20
 **Dishta* is another son of *Manu*. His son, *Naabhaaga* became a *vaishya*. He had a son *Balandhana*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 20:    


## 21
 Balandhanaat vatsapreetih udaarakeertih | 
_____
*Vatsapreeti* was born to *Balandhana*, and he was very famous. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 21:    
 Vatsapreeteh praamshuh abhavat |   


## 22
 **Vatsapreeti* had a son by name *Praamshu*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 22:    
 Prajaapatih cha praamshoh eko abhavat |   


## 23
 **Praamshu* had a son by name *Prajaapati*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 23:    
 Tatah cha khanimitrah |   


## 24
 
_____
 His son was *Khanimitra*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 24:    
 Tasmaat chakshushah |   


## 25
 **Chakshusha* was son of *Khanimitra*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 25:    
 Chakshushaat cha atibala paraakramo vimsho abhavat |
_____
 [[8]] of 249 





## 26
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4
_____
 
_____
 From *Chakshusha, Vimsha* was born, who was also very powerful and valiant. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 26:    
 Tatah vivimshakah |   


## 27
 **Vimsha's* son was *Vivimshaka*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 27:    
 Tasmaat cha khaninetrah |   


## 28
 
_____
 Then, *Khaninetra*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 28:    


## 29
 Tatah cha ativibhootih | 
_____
Then, *Ativibhooti*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 29:    


## 30
 Ativibhooteh atibala paraakramah karandhamah putro abhavat | 
_____
*Ativobhooti* had a son by name *Karandhama*, who was also very powerful and valiant. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 30:    
 Tasmaat api avikshit |   


## 31
 
_____
 His son was *Avikshit*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 31:    
 Avikshitah api atibala paramaakramah putro marutto naamaa   
abhavat | Yasyema adyaapi shlokou geeyete |
_____
 [[9]] of 249 





## 32
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4
_____
 **Avikshit* had a powerful and valiant son by name *Marutta. Marutta* was very famous, and there are two *shlokaas* which are quite popular, even to this day. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 32:    
 Maruttasya yathaa yajnyah tathaa kasya abhavat bhuvi |   
 Sarvam hiranmayam yasya yajnyavastu atishobhanam ||   


## 33
 **Marutta* did a *yajnya*. Nobody has performed a *yajnya* as he has performed, as everything was gold. All items used there were golden. It was so beautiful to look at, and was so well performed. Nobody performed *yajnya* like this. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 33:    
 Amaadyat indrah somena dakshinaabhih dvijaatayah |   
 Marutah pariveshtaarah sadasyaah cha divoukasah ||   
 
_____
 In that *yajnya*, after having received *Somarasa, Indra* felt great joy. All the *Brahmins* were very satisfied with the *dakshinaa* they received. They were all feeding. All the persons sitting there in the *sadas* were all gods, *devataas*. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
 Amaadyat iti | Pariveshtaarah bhojayitaarah |   


## 34
 
_____
 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 34:    
 Sa maruttah chakravartee narishyanta naamaanam putram avaapa |   


## 35
 **Marutta* had a son by name *Narishyanta*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 35:    
 Tasmaat cha damah |
_____
 [[10]] of 249 





## 36
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4
_____
 
_____
 He had a son by name *Dama*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 36:    
 Damasya putro raajavardhano jajnye |   


## 37
 
_____
 Dama had a son Raajavardhana. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 37:    
 Raajavardhanaat suvruddhih |   


## 38
 
_____
 From *Raajavardhana, Suvruddhi*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 38:    
 Suvruddheh kevalah |   


## 39
 
_____
 From *Suvruddhi, Kevala*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 39:    
 Kevalaat sudhrutih abhoot |   


## 40
 
_____
 From *Kevala, Sudhruti*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 40:    
 Tatah cha narah |   


## 41
 
_____
 Then, *Nara*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 41:    
 Tasmaat chandrah |   
 
_____
 Then *Chandra*.  [[11]] of 249 





## 42
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 42:    
Tatah kevalo abhoot |   


## 43
 
_____
 Then *Kevala*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 43:    
 Kevalaat bandhumaan |   


## 44
 
_____
 From *Kevala, Bandhumaan*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 44:    
 Bandhumato vegavaan |   


## 45
 
_____
 From *Bandhumaan*, *Vegavaan*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 45:    
 Vegavato budhah |   


## 46
 
_____
 From *Vegavaan*, *Budha*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 46:    
 Tatah cha trunabinduh |   


## 47
 
_____
 From *Budha*, *Trunabindu*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 47:    
 Tasya api ekaa kanyaa ilavilaa naama |   


## 48
 **Trunabindu* had a daughter by name *Ilaavilaa*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 48:    
 Tatah cha aalambusaa naama vara apsaraah trunabindu bheje |
_____
 [[12]] of 249 





## 49
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 Then, a very good apsaras by name *Alambusaa* married *Trunabindu*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 49:    


## 50
Tasyaam api asya vishaalo jajnye yah pureem vishaalaam nirmame | 
_____
*Trunabindu* with that apsaras, had a son called *Vishaala*. He built a city called *Vishaalaa* itself. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 50:    


## 51
Hemachandrah cha vishaalasya putro abhavat | 
_____
*Vishaala* had a son *Hemachandra*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 51:    


## 52
Tatah chandrah | 
_____
His son was *Chandra*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 52:    


## 53
Tat tanayo dhoomraakshah | 
_____
*Chandra's* son was *Dhoomraaksha*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 53:    


## 54
Tasya api sanjayo abhoot | 
_____
Then *Sanjaya*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 54:    


## 55
Sanjayaat sahadevah | 
_____
Then *Sahadeva*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 55:    


## 56
Tatah cha krushaashvo naama putro abhavat | 
_____
Then, a son called *Krushaashva*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 56:    
Somadattah krushaashvaat jajnye yo dasha ashvamedhaan   


## 57
aajahaara | 
_____
*Somadatta* was born to *Krushaashva*, and he did ten *Ashvamedha* *yajnyaas*. There is also a *paathantara* that he did *shata* *ashvamedha*, 100 *Ashvamedhaas*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 57:    


## 58
Tat putro janameyayah | 
_____
His son is *Janamejaya*.  [[13]] of 249 www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 58:    


## 59
Janamejayaat sumatih |
_____
 *Janamejaya* had a son called *Sumati*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 59:    


## 60
Ete vaishaalikaa bhoobhrutah | 
_____
They all belong to *Vishaala* *vamsha*. All of them kings. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 60:    


## 61
Shloko api atra geeyate | 
_____
There is a *shloka* also in respect of them. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 61:    
Trunabindoh prasaadena sarve vaishaalikaa nrupaah |   


## 62
Deerghaayusho mahaatmaano veeryavanto atidhaarmikaah | 
_____
All the kings belonging to *Vishaala vamsha*, all live for a long time; they are all great kings, very valiant, and also following *dharma*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 62:    
Sharyaateh kanyaa sukanyaa naama abhavat yaam upayeme   


## 63
chyavanah | 
_____
*Sharyaati* is another son of* Manu. Sharyaati* had a daughter by name *Sukanyaa. Chyavana* married her. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 63:    


## 64
Aanartanaamaa parama dhaarmikah sharyaati putro abhavat | 
_____
*Sharyaati* also had a son by name *Aanarta*. Who was *parama dhaarmika*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 64:    
Aanartasya api revata naama putro jajnye, yah asaavaanarta   


## 65
vishayam bubhuje pureem cha kushasthaleem adhyuvaasa | 
_____
*Aanarta* had a son by name *Revata*. He enjoyed *Aanarta's* kingdom, and lived in the city of *Kushasthalee*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 65:    
Revatasya api raivatah putrah kakudmi naamaa dharmaatmaa   


## 66
bhraatrushatasya jyeshtho abhavat | 
_____
*Revata* had hundred sons, his name was *Raivata Kakudmi*. He was a *dharmaatmaa*. He was the eldest of hundred brothers. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 66:    
Tasya cha revatee naama kanyaa abhavat |
_____
 He had a daughter by name *Revati*. 



 [[14]] of 249 





## 67
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 67:    
Sah taam aadaaya kasya iyam arhati iti bhagavantam abjayonim   
prashtum brahmalokam jagaama | 
_____
He took his daughter *Revati* and wanted to know whom he should marry off his daughter *Revati*. In order to know who is the best person suited for his daughter *Revati*, he wanted to ask *Chaturmukha Brahma*. So he went to *Brahma loka*. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
 Sa iti | Brahma lokam jagaama iti | Brahmalokah - satyalokah na tu   
merusthah; yato raivate brahmanah antike tihthati eva merustho   
brahmaa devaih saha ashtavimshat dvaaparaante   
krushnaavataaraartham ksheerodam agamat iti panchame amshe   
vakshyati | Atah satya lokastha hiranyagarbha amsho anyo brahmaa   


## 68
merustha iti na virodhah |
_____
 *Brahma loka* is *Satya loka*. In *Meru parvata*, there is another *Brahma*. The one referred here is the *Chaturmukha Brahma* in *Satya loka*. The *Hiranyagarbha* who is there in *Satya loka*, his *amsha* only is also there in *Meru*; so there is no difference. *Raivata* is also near *Brahma loka*. The *Brahma* who is in *Meru*, along with all the gods, at the end of 28th *Dvaapara*, he went to *Ksheerasaagara*, in order to pray to God for *Krishnaavataara*. This will come in the Fifth *Amsha*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 68:    
 Taavat cha brahmano antike haahaahoohhoo sanjnyaabhyaam   
gandharvaabhyaam atitaanam naama divyam gaandharvam ageeyata   


## 69
|
_____
 At that time, in *Brahma loka*, in *Chaturmukha Brahma's aasthaana*, the *Haahaa Hoohoo gandharvaas* were singing a *divya gaandharva geeta*, called *Atitaana*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 69:    
 Tat cha trimaarga parivruttaih aneka yuga parivru\(ttim\)tteeh   
tishthan api raivatah shrunvan muhoortam iva mene |   
 **Raivata* along with his daughter *Revati* started listening to that, and though he listened for so many *yugaas*, so many *yugaas* passed by as he was listening to the divine music of the *gandharvaas*, he thought it was just a *muhoorta*. So many *yugaas* went just like a flash.  [[15]] of 249 



www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
 Tat iti | Parivruttayah parivartaah | Ete dattilaadishu drashtavyaah   
| Trimaarga parivruttaih chitra dakshina dhaatraakhyaah   
trimaargaah tat vishaye kaala vishesha yukta geeta gaana   
kriyaabhyaam | Aneka yuga parivruttih iti kaalaadhvanoh iti   
dviteeyaa | Parivruttih iti cha paathah |   


## 70
 
_____
 These are special details about the music. There are three *maargaas* told - *Chitra, Dakshina* and *Dhaatraa*. Though many *yugaas* passed by as he was listening to that beautiful music, he thought he had just spent a *muhoorta*. A *muhoorta* is said to be 40 minutes. 30 *muhoortaas* is a day. It went by so fast that he did not even realize that so many *yugaas* went. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 70:    
Geetaavasaane cha bhagaavantam abjayonim pranamya raivatah   


## 71
kanyaayogyam varam aprucchat | 
_____
At the end of that singing, he prostrated to *Chaturmukha Brahma*, and asked him who is the suitable match for his daughter *Revati*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 71:    
Tatah cha asou bhagavaan akathayat kathaya yo abhimatah te vara   


## 72
iti | 
_____
Then *Chaturmukha Brahma* asked him "What do you have in your mind? Who is the best suited according to your opinion. I would like to listen to that first". 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 72:    
Punah cha pranamya bhagavate tasmai yathaa abhimataanaam   
aatmanah sa varaan kathayaamaasa ka eshaam bhagavato abhimata   


## 73
iti yasmai kanyaam imaam prayacchaami iti | 
_____
Again he prostrated to *Chaturmukha* *Brahma*, and told him who all he had in his mind - who are the bridegrooms he had in mind. Then he asked *Chaturmukha* *Brahma*, among them, "Who do you think is the best suited for my daughter". 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 73:    
Tatah kinchit avanata shiraah sasmitam bhagavaan abjayonih aaha | 
_____
*Chaturmukha Brahma* bent down his head little bit, and with a slight smile in his face, says thus - 



 [[16]] of 249 





## 74
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 74:    
Ya ete bhavato abhimataa naiteshaam saampratam putra poutra   


## 75
apatya apatyasantatih api avaneetale asti | 
_____
Whatever names you have told, O *Raivata*, their sons, grandsons, great grandsons, none of them are existing today on earth. Their entire *vamsha* itself does not exist, so many *chaturyugaas* have gone already. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 75:    
Bahooni tava atra eva gaandharvam shrunvatah chaturyugaani   


## 76
ateetaani |
_____
 Your listening to the *gandharva gaana* here, so many *chaturyugaas* have passed by in the meanwhile. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 76:    
Saampratam maheetale ashtaavimshatitama manoh chaturyugam   
ateetapraayam vartate | 
_____
The 28th *chaturyuga* is now running on earth. *Manu's* 28th *chaturyuga* is now running. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   


## 77
Saampratam iti | Ashtaavimshati tamam chaturyugam |
_____
 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 77:    


## 78
Aasan no hi kalih | 
_____
*Kali yuga* is about to come. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 78:    
Anyasmai kanyaaratnam idam bhavataa ekaakinaa abhimataaya   


## 79
deyam | 
_____
You have to give your daughter *Revati* to someone else, whom you have in mind, and whom you like. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 79:    
Bhavato api putra mitra kalatra mantri bhrutya bandhu bala   


## 80
koshaadayah samastaah kaalena etena atyantam ateetaah | 
_____
Even your own children, friends, wife, ministers, all your servants, relatives, your army, your treasury, everything, over a period which has passed by, is dissolved. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 80:    
Tatah punarapi utpanna saadhvaso raajaa bhagavantam pranamya   


## 81
papraccha | 
_____
The king got scared, again prostrated to *Brahma* and asked him. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 81:  
_____
 [[17]] of 249 





## 82
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 
_____
Bhagavan evam avasthite mayaa iyam kasmai deyeti | 
_____
O *Bhagavaan*, if such is the case, whom should I give my daughter in hand to? 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 82:    
Tatah sa bhagavaan kinchidavanamrakandharah krutaanjalih   


## 83
bhootvaa sarva loka guruh ambhojayonih aaha | 
_____
Again, he bent down his head a little bit, and did *anjalibandha, **namaskaara*; that one who was born on the lotus, said thus - 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 83:    
Brahmovaacha -   
Na hi aadi madhya antam ajasya yasya vidmo vayam sarvamayasya   
dhaatuh |   
Na cha svaroopam na param prabhaavam na chaiva saaram   
parameshvarasya || 
_____
*Brahma* - He starts to describe the greatness and qualities of *Parabrahma*, and that one of His *avataaras* is going to manifest in the *pruthivi*, earth. For that, he starts to praise *Bhagavaan*. This is the *Brahma Stuti* of *Paramaatman*. There is no end, there is no beginning of that unborn one. We do not know His beginning or end. He is everything. He is the Creator of the world. He is everything, present everywhere. One cannot know His *jnyaana aananda svaroopa*. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na iti | Svaroopam jnyaana anaandaadi lakshanam | Prabhaavam \*   
Paraa asya shaktih vividhaiva shrooyate svaabhaavikee \* ityaadi   
uktam prabhaavam | Saaram vishva dhaarana niyamanaadi kshamam   


## 84
balam | 
_____
He has all the *jnyaana, bala*, which are *svaabhaavikee*, natural to Him, not given by anyone. That *Parameshvara's prabhaava, svaroopa*, who can know? How He supports everything, controls everything, that power we cannot know. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 84:    
Kalaa muhoortaadimayah cha kaalo na yat vibhooteh parinaama   
hetuh |   
Ajanma naashasya sadaikamoorteh anaamaroopasya sanaatanasya   
||
_____
 His *vibhooti*, which is *Paramapada*. All the *parinaama* which happens here due to *kaala - kalaa, muhoorta, kaastha, dina, paksha, ahoraatra, ayana, **samvatsara*, do not happen in His *vibhooti, nitya vibhooti*. The *kaala* which is having all these divisions, does not cause any change or  [[18]] of 249 



www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 *parinaama* in the *nitya vibhooti*. He does not have *naama, roopa*, He can be present as anything, any name, any form, anywhere. He is everything, He is *sanaatana*. He is *nitya*. He does not have *janma, naasha*. He is unchanging. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kaala iti | Kaala muhoorta iti anena \* Tripaadasya amrutam divi \*   
Yatra poorve saadhyaah santi devaah \* Divyam sthaanam ajaram \*   
ityaadi shruti siddhasya parama padasya akaala kaalyatvam uchyate   
| Ajanma naaashasya karma nimitta shareera grahana tat viyogah   
rahitasya | Sadaa eka moorteh - sadaa eka roopaasya | Samasta   
moorteh iti cha paathah | Anaama roopasya karma kruta deva aadi   


## 85
naama roopa asprushtasya |
_____
 *Paramapada* is not under the control of *kaala*. There, *kaala* is under the control of *Paramaatman*. Nothing happens there under the control of *kaala*. It is *apraakruta. Janma, naasha* due to *karma* does not happen to Him. Because of *karma*, being born with a body is not there for Him. Association with the body is *janma*, and separation from the body is *marana*, because *jeevaatman* is also *nitya* - this is not there for Him. Due to *karma*, the *baddhaas* get the *deva* and other forms and names. This is not there for *Paramaatman*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 85:    
Yasya prasaadaat aham achyutasya bhootah prajaasrushtikarah   
antakaaree |   
Krodhaat cha rudrah sthiti hetu bhooto yasmaat cha madhye   
purushah parasmaat || 
_____
I have become the creator because of the grace of whom - it is *Paramaatman* only. I am born from His *prasaada*, His pleasant mind, His sattva. *Rudra* is born from His *krodha*. He Himself becomes the *sthiti **hetu* *bhoota*, in between *Chaturmukha Brahma* and *Rudra. Vishnu* is His own *avataara*, and He takes care of sustenance. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yasya iti | Yasmaat cha madhya iti | Srashtru samhartroh madhye   
sthiti hetu bhootah purushah
_____
 
_____
svayam parasmaat yasmaat   


## 86
raamaadivat praadurbhootah | 
_____
He is born Himself, as *Raama* and other *avataaraas*, as *Vishnu*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 86:    
Madroopam asthaaya srujatyajo yah sthitou cha yo asou purusha   
svaroopee |   
Rudra svaroopena cha yah atti vishvam dhatte tathaa ananta vapuh   
samastam ||
_____
 [[19]] of 249 





## 87
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 He takes my form and does all the creation, being my *antaryaami*, my inner controller. Through me, He does all the creation. so, the ultimate creator is *Paramaatman* only. In His own manifestation, He takes care of sustenance. Taking the form of *Rudra*, being the *antaryaami* to *Rudra*, He does the *samhaara, pralaya*. Everything is *shareera* to Him. Everything is His *prakaara*, mode. He supports everything. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 87:    
Paakaaya yo agnitvam upaiti lokaan bibharti pruthvee vapuh   
avyayaatmaa |   
Shakraadi roopee paripaati vishvam arka indu roopah cha tamo   


## 88
hinasti ||
_____
 In order that everything can be cooked by fire, He takes the form of *Agni*. He takes the form of *Pruthvi*, and supports all the worlds. He is unchanging. Everything being His *shareera*, He controls everything being the inner controller of everything. He nurtures the whole world taking the form of *Indra* and others. He takes the form of Sun and Moon, and destroys the darkness of this world. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 88:    
Karoti cheshtaa shvasanah svaroopee lokasya truptim jala anna   
roopee |   
Dadaati vishvasthiti samsthitah tu sarvaavakaasham cha nabha   
svaroopee || 
_____
He is the one who is present as the *pancha vrutti praana - praana, **apaana, vyaana, udaana, samaana*. This is told as *cheshtaa* - this also comes in " *Adhisthaanam tathaa kartaa karanam cha pruthak vidham | **Vividhaah cha pruthak chesthaah daivam cha eva atra panchamam*" in the *Bhagavad Gita*. Being the *praana roopa*, He only does the functions of *apaana, udaana*, etc. He takes the form of *jala* and *anna* and gives *trupti* to the whole world. One who is present to sustain this whole world. He gives stability or sustenance to the world, being the sustainer of this whole world. He gives space being the *svaroopa* of *aakaasha* itself. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: 
_____
**Karoti iti | Vishva sthiti samsthitah vishva sthityai samsthitah \*   
Vishtabhyaaham \* iti uktatvaat |   


## 89
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 89:    
Yah srujyate sargakrut aatmanaa eva yah paalyate paalayitaa cha   
devah |   
Vishvaatmakah samhriyate antakaaree pruthak trayasya asya cha   
yah anvayaatmaa || 
_____
The creator creates everything by Himself. He Himself became many. He  [[20]] of 249 



www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 nurtures everything, and He Himself is the nurturer of all. He is the destroyer who withdraws everything unto Himself. All these three functions he does separately. He is unchanging, *avikaari*. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yah srujyata iti | Sargakrut yah vishvaatmanaa aatmanaa eva   
srujyata iti anvayah | Aatmanaa iti prakrutyaa truteeyaa | Vishva   
aatma bhootah svayam eva srujyata iti arthah | Evam uttaratra api   
| Trayasya srujyaadeh srashtraadeh cha | Pruthak na yasya asti iti   
paathe etat anaatmakam naasti iti arthah | \* Na tat asti vinaa yat   


## 90
syaat \* iti | 
_____
One who is the *antaraatmaa* of the entire world. He creates by Himself. There is another *paatha* which says that there is nothing which is separated from Him. Everything is *Bhagavat aatmaka*. There is nothing which *abrahmaatmaka*. Everything is *Brahmaatmaka* is the meaning. This is told in Bhagavad Gita as " *Na tat asti vinaa yat syaat mayaa bhootam **charaacharam*".
_____
 Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 90:    
Yasmin jagat yo jagat etat aadyo yam cha aashrito asmin jagati   
svayambhooh |   
Sa sarvabhoota prabhavo dharitryaam sva amshena vishnuh nrupteh   


## 91
avateernah || 
_____
He Himself is the whole world, and everything is in Him. He is the one who is supporter of everything. Everything is standing on Him means that everything is in Him only. Everything is *shareera* to Him. The whole world is Him only. *Jagat cha sah* was told in the beginning. Everything is His *prakaara*, being His shareera. He only is present as everything. *Shareera* *vaachaka shabdaas* go upto *shareeri*. Names which are used to connote the body, extend up to the inner self. All the names extend up to *Paramaatman* in the *aparyavasaana vrutti*. He is the creator of everything. In this world, *Svayambhu* is also supported in Him only. He Himself is *Svayambhu*. He is the one who is creator of all beings. Through His own *amsha*, He has come down to this world, that Vishnu, He is manifesting. He has done His *avataara*, with His own *amsha, Vishnu*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 91:    
Kushasthalee yaa tava bhoopa ramyaa puree puraa abhoot   
amaraavatee iva |   
Saa dwaarakaa samprati tatra chaaste sa keshavaamsho baladeva   
naamaa || 
_____
You had a city by name *Kushasthalee*, which was yours, so beautiful. It was like *Indra's Amaraavatee*. It is now known as *Dwaarakaa. Keshava's **amsha, Baladeva* has manifested there.  [[21]] of 249 



www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kushasthalee iti | Poorvam velaa sthitaa satee kushasthalee   
krushnena samudraat labdha dvaadasha yojana sthalena saha   


## 92
dwaarakaa krutaa | 
_____
From *samudra*, he took 12 *yojanaas* of land, along with this, *Kushasthalee* got extended and became *Dwaarakaa*. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 92:    
Tasmai tvam enaam tanayaam narendra prayaccha maayaa   
manujaaya jaayaam |   
Shlaaghyo varo asou tanayaa tava iyam stree ratna bhootaa   
sadrusho hi yogah || 
_____
*Krishna's anuja, Balaraama* is there. To him, give your daughter *Revati*. Through His own *sankalpa*, He is born as a man. This excellent daughter of yours, please give to Him. He is a suitable and worthy husband to your daughter. 
_____
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   


## 93
Tasmaa iti | Maayaa manujaaya sankalpa bhoota manujaaya |
_____
 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 93:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Iti eerito asou kamalodbhavena bhuvam samaasaadya patih   
prajaanaam |   
Dadarsha hrasvaan purushaan viroopaan alpoujasa svalpa viveka   


## 94
veeryaan || 
_____
*Sri Paraasharar* - After *Chaturmukha* *Brahma* tells him all these details, the king *Raivata* comes to the earth, and sees that everyone is so dwarfish, so small. Because so many *chaturyugaas* have gone. They were all *viroopa*. They had very little *tejas*. They had very little *viveka*, *veerya*. Compared to him, he sees all of them as very diminutive, and with very little knowledge. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 94:    
Kushasthaleem taam cha pureem upetya drushtvaa anyaroopaam   
pradadou sa kanyaam |   
Seeraayudhaaya sphatikaachalaabha vakshasthalaaya atuladhee   
narendrah || 
_____
He comes to the city of *Kushasthalee*. It was looking very different from what it was when he used to be there. He gives the *kanyaa* to *Seeraayudha*, who is *Balaraama*. Whose *vakshasthala* had the hue of great *sphatika parvata*. 



 [[22]] of 249 





## 95
www.sadagopan.orgSri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 95:    
Uccha pramaanaam iti taam avekshya sva laangalaagrena sa   
taalaketuh |   
Vinaamayaamaasa tatah cha saa api babhoova sadyo vanitaa yathaa   


## 96
anyaa || 
_____
*Taalaketu, Balaraama* saw that *Revati* was very tall, and big compared to him. Because all the people at that time, were very diminutive comparatively, as so many *chaturyugaas* had already passed. He took his *halaayudha*, and with its edge, he pulled her down, and immediately she became as diminutive as all other people, and suitable to him. 
_____
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 4, Chapter 1, Shloka 96:    
Taam revateem raivata bhoopa kanyaam seeraayudho asou vidhinaa   
upayeme |   
Dattvaa atha kanyaam sa nrupo jagaama himaalayam vai tapase   
dhrutaatmaa || 
_____
*Balaraama*, according to *vidhi*, he married her, after making her short, suitable to him, as per people who were existing at that time. After having given his daughter in marriage to *Balaraama*, King *Raivata* went to *Himaalaya* for doing tapas. This is the story of *Raivata* and *Revati. Raivata* and *Revati* go to *Chaturmukha* *Brahma*, and get mesmerized by listening to the music of *Gandharvaas* there, spends many *chaturyugaas* there, and comes back and sees that nobody is there; *Chaturmukha* *Brahma* says that *Krishna* has manifested there, and His brother *Balaraama* is there, who is also His *amsha* manifested as a human, that He is the right person for his daughter. This is the story of marriage of *Revati* and *Balaraama*. This concludes Chapter 1. *|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Chaturthe Amshe Prathamo Adhyaayah ||** || Iti Sri Vishnu Chitteeye Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Chaturthe **Amshe Prathamo Adhyaayah ||
_____
* || Atha Dviteeyo Adhyaayah ||
_____
 
_____
Raivata’s Vamsha
_____
 
