+++
title = "005 Ramaṇaka, Hiraṇmaya, Airāvata"

+++
 

## *The sages said*:

1\. O best one, tell us duly the names of countries and mountains, so also (about) those that live on those mountains.

## *Sūta said*:

2-4. On the south of Śveta and on the north of Niṣadha there is the country named Ramaṇaka. The men there are born in pure noble families, and all of them are handsome; and all the men that are born there are without enemies. O glorious ones, they being always cheerful, live for eleven thousand and five hundred years.

5-6a. On the south of Nīla and on the north of Niṣadha there is a country called Hiraṇmaya, where there is the river Hairaṇvatī, where, O very wise ones, lives this best bird, the king of birds (i.e. Garuḍa).

6b-8a. The brahmaṇas there follow (i.e. perform) sacrifices, and the archers are handsome. O brahmaṇas, the men there are very strong and always have cheerful hearts. O you great ascetics, they live for a span of twelve thousand and five hundred years.

8b-11a. O best brahmaṇas, the mountain has only three sacred summits. One of them is full of jewels; (another) one, golden and wonderful; (still another) one is full of all gems and looks beautiful with mansions. There the respectable self-luminous-lady Śaṇḍinī always lives. O best brāhmaṇas, beyond the Śṛṅgavat mountain, and on its north and near the ocean is the country called Airāvata.

11b-14a. The sun has no scope there; men do not decay. (Only) the moon with the stars covers it like a light. The men there are born with the splendour of lotuses, with the complexion of lotuses and with eyes resembling lotus-petals, and with the fragrance of lotuses. They are unfallen, of agreeable fragrance (possessed by their bodies); they do not eat food and have their senses controlled. O brāhmaṇas, all of them have fallen from the world of gods, and are without any blemish.

14b-15a. O best brahmaṇas, those most religious men live a span of life of thirteen thousand years.

15b-19. So also to the north of the milky ocean lives the lord, Vaikuṇṭha, Viṣṇu, in a golden car. The car has eight wheels, has (celestial) beings on it and has the speed of mind. It has a colour like fire, is very effulgent, and is decorated with gold. O best brahmaṇas, he is the lord of all creatures. He is the withdrawal and the expansion, so also he fashions and gets fashioned (i.e. he is the cause of the destruction and creation of) the earth, water, ether, air and fire. He is the sacrifice for all creatures and fire is his mouth.


