+++
title = "007 Span of Life in the Four Yugas"

+++
 

## *The sages said*:

1-2. Tell us, in detail, of the measure (i.e. span) of life, strength, the auspicious and inauspicious, the future, past and present (of the residents) of Bhāratavarṣa, Himavat, and also Harivarṣa.

## *Sūta said*:

3-8. There are four yugas in Bhāratavarṣa. The first yuga was Kṛta; then there was Tretāyuga, O brāhmaṇas. After that Dvāpara sets in; then comes Kali. The span of life, O best sages, was known to be four thousand years, in Kṛtayuga. O ascetics, similarly they know that the span of life in Tretāyuga is three thousand years. The span of life at present in Dvāpara is two thousand years; for that much period men live on the earth. However, in Tiṣya (i.e. Kali)-yuga, men die while in womb, and also they die as soon as they are born.

9-11. In Kṛtayuga, O brāhmaṇas, very strong, very powerful men, having the attribute of wisdom were born and begotten in hundreds and thousands. O brāhmaṇas, strong and handsome brāhmaṇas were born and begotten in Kṛtayuga. Ascetics with penance as their treasure were born and begotten endowed with great perseverence, high souls, pious and truthful in speech. The kṣatriyas also are born handsome, able-bodied, of great valour, skilled in archery and brave in battles, and esteemed by the brave. In Tretāyuga, all the kṣatriyas were emperors.

12-15. In Dvāparayuga, however, all the castes were always born with great energy, power and desire to kill one another. Men born in Kaliyuga will possess little lustre, are said to be wrathful, greedy, untruthful. Human beings in Kaliyuga will have jealousy, pride, and also anger, deceit and malice, O brāhmaṇas; in the middle yuga, Dvāpara, a small portion remains. In qualities, Himavat is superior (to Bharatavarṣa) and Harivarṣa is superior to that.


