+++
title = "010 Dialogue between Nārada and Yudhiṣṭhira"

+++
 

## *The sages said*:

1-2. Having heard the measure and the position of the earth, so also (having heard) about the rivers from you, we have just drunk nectar. We have heard that there are holy places on the earth. Describe them to us and also how they are fruitful. O very wise one, we desire to hear about them in detail from you.

## *Sūta said*:

3-4. O you ascetics, you have asked about an excellent, meritorious, great account. I shall narrate it to the best of my knowledge, suitably and as I have heard it. I shall tell you the ancient conversation of the celestial sage Nārada with Yudhiṣṭhira. O best brāhmaṇas, listen.

5\. The Pāṇḍavas, the sons of Pāṇḍu, the illustrious great heroes, deprived of their kingdom, lived in the forest with Draupadī.

6\. They saw the high-souled celestial sage Nārada, shining with brāhmaṇic lustre, and bright like blazing fire (who had come) there.

7\. That celebrated descendant of Kuru, surrounded by those brothers (of him), shone with glowing splendour as Indra surrounded by gods in heaven.

8\. As Sāvitrī did not abandon the gods, or as the sun’s light does not leave Meru, Yājñasenī (i.e. Draupadī) did not, due to her piety, forsake the sons of Pṛthā (i.e. of Kuntī, i.e. the Pāṇḍavas).

9-10. That revered sage Nārada, having accepted the homage, consoled that son of Dharma (i.e. Yudhiṣṭhira) with proper, well-formed and agreeable (words), and spoke to the noble Dharmarāja Yudhiṣṭhira: “O best among those who practise piety, what do you desire? What should I give you?”

11-14. Then king (Yudhiṣṭhira), the son of Dharma, having along with his brothers saluted Nārada, and with the palms of his hands joined, spoke to Nārada, resembling a god: “O you illustrious one, when you, revered by all the worlds, are pleased, then I think, (everything) is affected through your grace, O you of a good vow. O best sage, O sinless one, if you (are going to) favour me with my brothers, then (please) remove the doubt in my mind. O brāhmaṇa, (please) remove the doubt in my mind. O brāhmaṇa, (please) tell (us) fully about the fruit that he who, devoted to the holy places, goes round (over) the earth, gets.”

## *Nārada said*:

15-18. O king, listen attentively as to how formerly Dilīpa heard all this from Vasiṣṭha. In ancient times the best and very lustrous king Dilīpa took up a religious vow and lived like a sage, O great king, at the auspicious, holy place Gaṅgādvāra on the bank of the Ganges resorted to by gods and gandharvas. He, of a great lustre, pleased (by offering oblations) his dead ancestors and gods. He also satisfied (by offering oblations) the sages with religious rites.

19-25. When the large-minded one was muttering (the names of a god) for some time, he saw the best sage Vasiṣṭha, resembling Śiva. When he saw that priest (of him) shining with glory, he was very much delighted and amazed. That best one among the righteous ones, took, according to the religious rites, the materials of worship on his head, and being pure and with his mind controlled, told his name to that best brāhmaṇic sage: “Well-being to you, I am Dilīpa, I am your servant, O you of a good vow. Just by seeing you I have become free from all sins.” O great king Yudhiṣṭhira, that Dilīpa, controlled in speech, and best among men, speaking thus, folded the palms of his hands, and remained silent. Seeing that Dilīpa, the best king, emaciated due to his vow and muttering to himself, the sage was pleased.


