+++
title = "012 Visit to Some Holy Places and Its Merit"

+++
 

## *Vasiṣṭha said*:

1-8. Turning round and moving to the right, he would approach the way to Jambu. Approaching the path of Jambu, adored by manes, gods and sages, he obtains (the fruit of) Aśvamedha and goes to Viṣṇu’s world. A man going (from there) after having stayed there for five or six nights, does not meet with ill luck, but obtains best success. Returning from Jambumārga, he should go to Dulikāśrama. He does not meet with indigence and is honoured in heaven. O king, he who engaged in worshipping the forefathers and gods observes a fast for three nights after reaching the hermitage of Agastya, would obtain the fruit of (having performed) an Agniṣṭoma sacrifice. By subsisting on vegetables or fruits he obtains the fruit of youthfulness; after reaching Kanyāśrama nourished with glory and revered by people, he is free from his sins the moment he enters it, since, O king, it is a meritorious and the best sacred grove. Being controlled and having limited food, he, after having worshipped his forefathers and deities, gets the fruit of a sacrifice full of (i.e. that satisfies) all desires. Having turned to the right, he would then go to Yayātipatana.

9-11. There he obtains the fruit of a horse sacrifice. Being restrained and having controlled his diet, from here he should go to Mahākāla. After having bathed in Koṭitīrtha he would obtain the fruit of a horse sacrifice. Then, O you righteous one, he should go to the holy place, the abode of the lord of Umā (i.e. Pārvatī). It is known as Bhadravata, and is well known in the three worlds. Having approached Śiva there he would obtain the fruit of (a present of) a thousand cows.

12-13. O best man, by Mahādeva’s (i.e. Śiva’s) grace he would obtain the leadership which is fruitful and without a rival. Having reached Narmada, well-known in the three worlds, and having offered oblations to his forefathers and gods (there) he would obtain the fruit of an Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.


