+++
title = "014 Sages Pray to God Śiva for Protection from Demon Bāṇa"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1\. The greatest river Narmadā, that is holy and most auspi-[?]-strands is divided into three (streams) by the glorious sages, longing for piety.

2\. O Pāṇḍava, the (three) divisions are just like (the three strands of) a sacred thread. O lord of kings, a man bathing in (any of) them is free from all sins.

3\. O son of Pāṇḍu, listen to me who am telling you about the origin of the sacred place Jaleśvara which is well-known in the three worlds.

4-5. Formerly all hosts of sages and all the groups of Maruts with Indra praised that magnanimous Maheśvara, the god of gods. Praising him, they reached (the place) where god Maheśvara stayed. The hosts of Maruts with Indra prayed to him: “O Virūpākṣa, we are distressed with fear. O lord, protect us.”

## *The* *lord, said*:

6-7. O best sages, welcome to you. For what purpose have you come here? What is (the cause of) your grief? What is (the cause of) your tormentation? Wherefrom has fear come (to you)? O glorious ones, tell (it); I desire to know it.

Thus addressed by Rudra, they, of unlimited vows, told him:

## *The* *sages said*:

8-11. There is a terrible, very powerful demon, proud of his strength, well-known by the name Bāṇa, whose divine city (called) Tripura, remaining in the sky moves by his lustre. O Virūpākṣa, we are afraid of him; we have sought your refuge only. Protect us from this great distress; you are our great shelter. O lord of gods, please do this favour to all (gods) so that gods, being very much pleased, (would) live happily, O Śaṅkara. O lord, do that by which they will be extremely happy.

## *The* *god* (*i.e*. *Śiva) said*:

12\. I shall do all this. Do not be dejected. In a very short time I shall do what makes you happy.

13-14. Having comforted all of them, and remaining on the bank of Narmada, the lord of gods thought over (the way) to kill him, O Pāṇḍava. ‘How, in what manner, should I kill Tripura?’ Thinking like this he remembered Nārada at that time. Just due to his remembering (Nārada), Nārada came to him.

## *Nārada said*:

15\. O Mahādeva, order me for what purpose I was remembered (by you). O god, tell me what mission I have to carry out.

## *The lord said*:

16-18a. O Nārada, go there where the city Tripura of Bāṇa, the lord of Dānavas, stands. Go quickly and do that. The husbands are like deities and the wives are like celestial nymphs. Due to their lustre, O Brāhmaṇa, Tripura moves in the sky. Going there, O lord of brāhmaṇas, give them a different advice.

18b-19a. Hearing the words of the lord, the sage of quick steps entered the city to alienate the hearts of the women (from their husbands).

19b-22. The celestial city adorned with gems of many kinds, shone. It was a hundred yojanas broad, and was doubly long. There only he saw Bāṇa, who was proud of his strength, who was adorned with garlands, ear-rings, armlets and a crown, who was covered with necklaces and gems, and who was decorated with silver. His wives were rich with gems and men were adorned with (ornaments of) gold. The very mighty lord of the demons got up on seeing Nārada.

## *Bāṇa said*:

23-24. The celestial sage himself has come to my house. O best brāhmaṇa, materials of worship and water for washing feet must properly be given. He has come after a long time. O brāhmaṇa, rest (on) this seat.

He thus honoured Nārada who had come there. His wife, the chief queen named Anaupamyā (spoke):

## *Anaupamyā said*:

25\. O revered sir, in the human world, by which vow or religious observance or gift or penance are gods pleased?

## *Nārada said*:

26-34. He who gives a cow made of sesamum to a brāhmaṇa who has mastered the Vedas, has (indeed) given the earth of nine islands along with the oceans. For an eternal period he enjoys with aeroplanes resembling crores of suns and satisfying all desires and rules for a very long time. There are various kinds of trees: hog-plum, wood-apple, grove of plantain trees; so also kadamba, campaka and aśoka. (So also there are the days like) the eighth, fourth, twelfth and both the Saṃkrānti day and Viṣuva day and the beginning of a day—all these are auspicious. Those women who fast (on these days), having acquired merit, undoubtedly live in heaven. The ascetic women, free from the Kali-age, free from all sins, and engaged in fasting, do not move (in the mundane existence). O you beautiful lady, having heard like this, do as you desire.

Hearing the words of Nārada, the queen said (these) words: “O best brāhmaṇa, show favour to me. Accept the grifts as desired (by you). (I shall give you) gold, gems, jewels, garments and ornaments. O brāhmaṇa, I shall also give you what is difficult (for you) to obtain. (Please) accept it, O best brāhmaṇa; may Viṣṇu and Śiva be pleased.”

## *Nārada said*:

35-37. O lady, give (it) to someone else—to a poor brāhmaṇa. I am endowed with a good character and have devotion.

O best of Bharatas, having thus taken away their hearts, and having advised all of them, he went (back) to his own place. With their hearts drawn away and therefore with their hearts gone elsewhere, a flaw came about in the city of that magnanimous Bāṇa.


