+++
title = "016 Kāverī Saṃgama Tīrtha"

+++
 

## *The sage said*:

1-3. All those magnanimous multitudes of people with Yudhiṣṭhira as the chief, and the sages, the abodes of penance, asked Nārada: “O revered one, tell us for the good of the people and for our prosperity, the great truth about the confluence of Kāverī, that wicked men who are always engaged in sinful activities, become free from all sins and go to the highest place (on bathing there). We desire to know this. O revered one, please tell it.”

## *Nārada said*:

4-7. O you all led by Yudhiṣṭhira, listen together: Having performed a great sacrifice here, Kubera of truthful valour, became more than a sovereign emperor after reaching this place. O great king, he attained perfection. Listen to me who am telling it. Kubera, the lord of yakṣas and of truthful valour, having bathed at the place where Kāverī joins Narmadā well-known in the world, practised penance for a hundred divine years. Mahādeva, pleased with him, granted him an excellent boon: “O yakṣa, O you of a great energy, speak about the boon that you desire. Tell me freely about your wish, or whatever is in your mind.”

## *Kubera said*:

8\. O lord of gods, if you are pleased with me, grant me the boon (by which) I would be the first lord of the yakṣas.

9\. Hearing the words of Kubera, god Maheśvara was pleased. Saying, ‘Let it be so’, he disappeared there only.

10\. That yakṣa too, who had obtained the boon, quickly went to the abode of yakṣas. He was honoured by all the lordly yakṣas, and was consecrated as the king.

11\. Those men, who do not know that the confluence of Kāverī (with Narmada) destroys all sins, are undoubtedly deceived.

12-17a. Therefore a man should make every effort to bathe there. Kāverī is very holy, and Narmada is a great river. O best king, one should bathe there and worship Śiva. Having received the fruit of a horse sacrifice he is honoured in the world of Rudra. As Śaṅkara has told me, he who enters fire or observes a fast (at the confluence of Kāverī and Narmadā) is not reborn. Being waited upon by excellent women, he enjoys in heaven like Rudra for sixty thousand and sixty crore years. Remaining in Rudra’s heaven he enjoys wherever he goes. Fallen due to the exhaustion of his religious merit, he becomes a righteous, prosperous, religious, great king, born in a (noble) family.

17b-19. Having properly drunk water there, a man would obtain the fruit of the (vow called) Cāndrāyaṇa. Those men who drink the holy water (at the confluence), go to heaven. Men get the same fruit as they obtain (by bathing) in Gaṅgā and Yamunā by bathing at the confluence of Kāverī (with Narmadā). O lord of kings, the place of the confluence of Kāverī (with Narmadā) is holy, gives great fruit and destroys all sins.


