+++
title = "017 Narmadā and the Holy Places on Her Northern Bank"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1-2. On the northern bank of Narmadā, there is an extensive holy place. It is known as Patreśvara, and is great and removes all sins. O king, having bathed there, a man rejoices with deities. Taking any form he likes, he sports for five thousand years.

3\. Then a man should go to Garjana where Megha is present. By the power of that holy place, it has attained the name Indrajit.

4\. Then he should go to (the holy place) Megharāva where there is the thundering of clouds. There the group Meghanāda has become prosperous due to boons.

5\. Then O lord of kings, he should go to (the holy place) known as Brahmāvarta. O Yudhiṣṭhira, Brahmā is always present there.

6-7a. O lord of kings, having bathed there, he is honoured in Brahmā’s heaven. Then, being restrained, and controlled in diet, (he should go to) the holy place Aṅgāreśvara. Being absolved of all sins, he goes to Rudra’s world.

7b-8a. Then, O lord, he should go to the excellent Kapilātīrtha. O king, having bathed there, he would obtain the fruit of having given away a cow.

8b-9a. Then he should go to Kāñcītīrtha resorted to by the hosts of gods and sages. Having bathed there, O king, a man would obtain (i.e. go to) the heaven of cows.

9b-10a. O lord of kings, then he should go to the excellent (holy place called) Kuṇḍaleśvara. Near there, Rudra lives with Umā.

10b. O lord of kings, one who bathes there, cannot be killed even by gods.

11\. Then he should go to Pippaleśvara, which destroys all sins. O lord of kings, he is honoured in Rudra’s heaven.

12\. Then, O lord of kings, he should go to the pure Vimaleśvara. There is the beautiful Devaśikhā, put down by the god.

13-17. Casting my life there I would obtain (i.e. go to) Rudra’s heaven. Then a man should go to Puṣkariṇī, and should bathe there. By just bathing there he would obtain half of Indra’s seat. Narmadā is the greatest among the rivers. She has flowed forth from Rudra’s body. She would liberate all immobile and mobile beings. The magnanimous lord, the god superior to all other gods, told (this) to the groups of sages, and especially to us. This excellent river Narmadā was praised by sages with a desire for the well-being of the worlds. She came out of Rudra’s body. She always removes all sins. She is saluted by all creatures.

18-20a. She is also extolled by gods, gandharvas and celestial nymphs: “Salutation to you, O (river) of holy water, O you going to the ocean. Salutation to you who was taken out by the sages from Śiva’s body. Salutation to you who are chosen by Dharma, O you of an excellent face; salutation to you, O you who are saluted by the host of sages. Salutation to you who purify the pure; salutation to you who are well-worshipped by the entire world.”

20b-22. He, who, with a pure mind daily recites this hymn, if a brāhmaṇa, obtains (mastery over) the Vedas; if a kṣatriya, would be victorious; if a vaiśya, would be profited; if a s ūdra, would get a good position. One who desires food, would always have it just by remembering her. God Maheśvara himself always resorts to Narmadā. Therefore the river should be looked upon as holy and remover of sins.


