+++
title = "018 More Tīrthas on the Bank of Narmadā"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1-7. Since then Brahmā and others, as well as the sages rich in penance, being free from lust and anger, resort to Narmadā, O king. Seeing the trident of the lord fallen at that place on the earth, the magnanimous Śiva narrated its importance. It came to be known as the great, most meritorious holy place Śūlabheda. He, who, having bathed there, would worship the god (Śiva), would obtain the fruit (of the gift) of a thousand cows. O king, he, who would pass three nights there, and would worship Mahādeva, would not be reborn. Then a man should go to Maheśvara, (then) to the excellent Narmadeśvara. (Then he should visit) the very meritorious Ādityeśvara. Then on worshipping Mallikeśvara with ghee and honey, be obtains the fruit of his existence. Then he should see (i.e. visit) Varuṇeśvara, the excellent Nirajeśvara. He gets the fruit of (visiting) all the holy places by seeing (i.e. visiting) these five. O lord of kings, he should go to the place where the battle was fought.

8-11. Koṭitīrtha is well-known where the demons were fought (with), and where these demons, proud of their strength, were destroyed. Seizing their heads he killed them who had gathered there. They installed (the representation of) Maheśvara with the trident in his hand. The point was placed there, therefore (the place) is known as Koṭitīrtha. By seeing that holy place, a man would physically go to heaven. At that time, due to meanness, Indra restrained (a man) by means of the wedge of his bolt. Since then, people’s going to heaven has been checked.

12-13. O Pāṇḍava, after having offered a coconut with ghee, at the end (of this rite), by all means he should, holding a lamp on his head, go round the (representation of the) god. He gets all his desires satisfied. When he dies, he obtains Rudrahood, and is not born again in this world. Having gone to heaven, then having ruled as a king, he goes to Indra’s paradise.

14-18. Similarly, having waited upon Mahādeva, a man who just bathes there gets the fruit of all sacrifices. Then, O lord of kings, a man should go to the very beautiful holy place—the excellent Agastyeśvara—that removes the sins of men. O king, a man, having bathed there, is absolved (of the sin) of killing a brāhmaṇa. A man with his senses controlled remaining in profound meditation, should bathe the representation of the god with ghee (on) the fourteenth day of the dark half of Kārtika. He, with twenty-one members (i.e. descendants) of his family, would never be deprived of lordly position. He should present cows, shoes, an umbrella, and a blanket, and also food to all brāhmaṇas. It would have a crorefold merit.

19-21. Then O lord of kings, a man should go to the excellent Ravistava. Having bathed (i.e. if a man bathes) there, he would get a throne (i.e. would be a king). On the right bank of Narmadā, the place holy to Indra (and called Śakratīrtha) is well-known. Having fasted there for a night, he should bathe. Having bathed there he should properly worship Janārdana (i.e. Viṣṇu). He gets the fruit of (having given away) a thousand cows. He goes to Viṣṇu’s world.

22-23. Thence he should go to Ṛṣitīrtha, which removes all the sins of men. A man, by just bathing there, is honoured in Śiva’s world. There only is the very beautiful holy place of (i.e. named after) Nārada. By just bathing there, a man would obtain the fruit of (giving away) a thousand cows.

24-25. Then he should go to Devatīrtha, formerly fashioned by Brahmā. O king, having bathed there, a man is honoured in Brahmā’s world. Then he should go to Amarakaṇṭaka, formerly established by gods. Having just bathed there, a man would obtain the fruit of having given away a thousand cows.

26-27. Then he should go to Vāmaneśvara. Seeing Vāmanaka there, he is absolved of the sin of killing a brāhmaṇa. Thence a man should go to Ṛṣitīrtha, and certainly to Īśāneśa. Then having gone to (i.e. if he visits) Vaṭeśvara, he obtains the fruit of his existence.

28-29. Thence a man should go to Bhīmeśvara, which destroys all diseases. A man, O king, by just bathing there is free from all misery. Then, O lord of kings, he should go to the excellent (holy place called) Varaṇeśvara. Having bathed there, a man is free from all misery, O king.

30-31. Then he should go to Somatīrtha and should see Candra. O king, then, being full of great devotion, having bathed there, he, obtaining a celestial body just at that moment, enjoys like Śiva for a long time. He is honoured for sixty thousand years in Śiva’s heaven.

32-36. Then O lord of kings, he should go to the excellent (holy place of) Piṅgaleśvara. By fasting for a day and night (there) he would obtain the fruit of (having fasted for) three nights. O lord of kings, he who gives a tawny cow (to a brāhmaṇa) at that holy place, is honoured in Rudra’s world for as many thousand years as there are hairs on his body and on the bodies of the members born in his family. O king, he who casts his life there, enjoys eternally as long as the moon and the sun will remain in the sky. Those men who, having resorted to the bank of Narmadā, die (there), go to heaven as the men of good deeds go.

37-41. Then on the day of Gaṅgāvataraṇa, he should go to Surabhikeśvara and (the holy place called) Nāraka and Koṭikeśvara. He is blessed; no doubt about it. Thence going to Nanditīrtha, he should bathe there. Lord of Nandi (i.e. Śiva) is pleased, and the man is honoured in Soma’s heaven. Then he should go to Dīpeśvara, and the penance-grove (called) Vyāsatīrtha. Formerly the great river turned back from there, being afraid of Vyāsa. Then, when he uttered the sound ‘hum’, she went (i.e. flowed) towards the south. O king, he who circumambulates at the holy place, has Vyāsa pleased with him, and he gets the desired fruit. He who puts a thread round (the representation of) the god along with the altar, sports for eternal time; and he is as Rudra is (i.e. becomes Rudra-like).

42-47. Thence, O lord of kings, he should go to the excellent sacred place (called) Eraṇḍī. Having bathed (there) at the confluence, he is absolved of all sins. Eraṇḍī is well-known in the three worlds (as) destroyer of sins. Or (on) the eighth of the bright fortnight in the month of Āśvina, a man having bathed, and being pure and intent upon fasting, should feed one brāhmaṇa, (thereby) a crore (of brāhmaṇas) are fed. Having bathed at the confluence at Eraṇḍī, and delighted in devotion, a man, having placed a pearl-oyster on his head, and having plunged into the water mixed with that of Narmadā, gets absolved of all sins. O king, he who would circumambulate at that holy place, goes round the earth consisting of seven islands.

48-51. Then having bathed at Suvarṇatilaka and having given gold (to a brāhmaṇa) he is honoured in Rudra’s world with a golden mansion. Then fallen from heaven after (some) time, he becomes a powerful king. Thence, O lord, he should go to the confluence of the river Ikṣu. It is well-known in the three worlds. Śiva is present there. O king, having bathed a man would attain the status of the head of the attendants of Śiva. Thence he should go to Skandatīrtha which destroys all sins. Sin committed from birth goes away merely by bathing there.

52-57a. Thence he should go to (the holy place called) Āṅgirasa, and should bathe there. He gets the fruit of (having given away) a thousand cows. He is honoured in Rudra’s heaven. From there he should go to Lāṅgalatīrtha which destroys all sins. Having gone there, O lord of kings, he should bathe there. There is no doubt that (thereby) he becomes free from sins committed during seven existences. Hence he should go to Vaṭeśvara, the best of all holy places. O king, having bathed there, he would obtain the fruit of (having given away) a thousand cows. From there, he should go to the great (holy place called) Saṅgameśvara which removes all sins. Having bathed there one gets a kingdom. There is no doubt about it. All that (merit) of the man who, after reaching Bhadratīrtha, gives gifts, would become a crorefold in effect by the power of that sacred place.

57b-58a. If a woman bathes there, she would become like Gaurī, and undoubtedly goes to Indra.

58b-62. Then he should go to Aṅgāreśvara, and should bathe there. A man, merely by bathing there, is honoured in Rudra’s world. On the Aṅgārakī caturthī (i.e. caturthī falling on a Tuesday) he should bathe there. Being instructed by Viṣṇu, he rejoices eternally. Having bathed at Ayonisaṅgama, he should see the Yonimandira. Having gone to Pāṇḍaveśvara, he should bathe there. He cannot be killed by gods or demons, and rejoices eternally. Then going to Viṣṇu’s heaven, he is full of sport and enjoyments. Having enjoyed great pleasures there, he is born as a king in the mortal world.

63\. He should go to Kambotikeśvara and should bathe there. When the summer solstice arrives, whatever he would desire would take place.

64\. Thence he should go to Candrabhāgā and bathe there. A man by just bathing there is honoured in Soma’s world.

65-69a. Then, O king of kings, he should go to the holy place of Śakra (i.e. Indra), which is well-known, and is honoured by the king of gods. He should give gold as a gift. Or he who would give a bull of a dark colour, would live in Hara’s city for as many thousand years as there are hairs on the body of the bull, and on the bodies of those that are born in his family. Then having fallen from heaven, he becomes a powerful king; and by the power of that holy place, he becomes, among thousands of mortals, the master of horses of white colour.

69b-74. Thence, O lord of kings, he should go to the excellent Brahmāvarta. Having bathed there, he should offer oblations to his divine manes by giving a piṇḍa according to the proper rites after having fasted for a night. When the Sun has entered Virgo, (this merit) would be stored eternally. Thence, O lord of kings, he should go to the excellent holy place (called) Kapilātīrtha. O king, he, who, after bathing there, gives a tawny cow (to a brāhmaṇa), would get the fruit which would be got by giving the entire earth. Narmadeśvara is a great holy place. There has not been or will not be (other) holy place (like this). O king, having bathed there, a man would obtain the fruit of a horse sacrifice. (A man who has gone there) is born as a sovereign emperor on the earth; he is perfect with all (good) characteristics and free from all diseases.

75-80. On the northern bank of Narmadā, there is a very auspicious holy place (called) Ādityāyana; it is charming and is created by the lord. O lord of kings, the gift given there after having bathed there becomes inexhaustible by the power of that holy place. Those that are poor, or diseased, or those that have done wicked deeds, are absolved of all sins, and go to the Sun’s world. On the seventh of the bright fortnight when the month of Māgha has come, he who, without food, and with his senses controlled, would live in the temple, never suffers from diseases, does not become blind or deaf. Being fortunate and endowed with handsomeness, he becomes dear to women. This holy place is said to be very holy by Mārkaṇḍeya. O lord of kings, those who do not go there are undoubtedly deceived.

81-85a. Thence he should go to Māseśvara, and should bathe there. A man merely by bathing there, would obtain heaven. Remaining in all worlds, he rejoices as long as fourteen Indras rule. Then remaining in the penance-grove called Nāgeś-vara which is nearby, and having bathed there, O lord of kings, and being pure and concentrated, he sports for eternal time with many Nāga damsels. He should go to Kubera’s abode, where Kubera stays. Kāleśvara is a great holy place where Kubera was pleased. Bathing there, O lord of kings, he would obtain all wealth.

85b-88. Then he should go westward to the best abode of the Maruts. Having bathed there, O lord of kings, being pure and concentrated, the intelligent one should then give gold and food according to his capacity. He goes to Vāyu’s world by the Puṣpaka aeroplane. O Yudhiṣṭhira, then in the month of Māgha he should go to my Tīrtha. On the fourteenth day of a dark fortnight he should bathe there. Then he should eat at night, and should not go to Yonisaṃkaṭa.

89-97a. Thence he should go to Ahalyātīrtha. After merely having bathed there, he rejoices with celestial nymphs. Ahalyā got liberated after having practised penance at the Parameśvara (tīrtha). When the thirteenth day of the bright half of Caitra has arrived, he should, on that day holy to god Cupid, worship Ahalyā. A man who is born anywhere (i.e. in any family), would be dear there. He would be dear to women, would be prosperous and like another god of love. Having reached Ayodhyā, (he should visit) the well-known Śakratīrtha. Having merely bathed there, a man would obtain the fruit of (giving) a thousand cows. Thence he should go to Somatīrtha and just bathe there. A man who has just bathed there, is absolved of all sins. On (the day of) the planet Moon, O lord of kings, it would remove all sins. O king, Somatīrtha is well-known in the three worlds, and gives a great fruit. O lord of men, he, who observes there the Cāndrāyaṇa vow, goes, after his soul is purified from all sins, to Soma’s heaven. He who dies at Somatīrtha by entering fire or in the water or by living without food, is not born in the mortal world.

97b-100. Thence he should go to Stambhatīrtha, and should bathe there. By merely bathing there, a man is honoured in Soma’s heaven. Then, O lord of kings, he should go to the excellent Viṣṇutīrtha. The excellent Viṣṇutīrtha is (also) well-known as Yodhanīpura. Vāsudeva fought with crores of demons there. There a holy place came up; and here (i.e. at this holy place) Viṣṇu would be pleased. By observing a fast day and night, he keeps off (the sin of) the murder of a brāhmaṇa.

101-104a. Then O lord of kings, he should go to the excellent (holy place called) Tāpaseśvara. It is known as Amohaka. There he should offer oblations to his manes. On the full moon or the new moon day he should offer a śrāddha according to the proper rite. Having bathed there, O king, he should offer piṇḍa to his manes. In it stand stones of the form of elephants. At that (holy place) he should offer piṇḍa—especially in (the month of) Vaiśākha. His manes remain pleased as long as the earth will remain.

104b-121. Thence, O lord of kings, he should go to the excellent Siddheśvara. Going there he should go near Gaṇapati. From there, he should go to the place where there is Janārdana (as a) liṅga. O lord of kings, having bathed there, he is honoured in Viṣṇu’s world. On the right bank of Narmada there is a very auspicious holy place. This great Kāmadeva (i.e. god of love) practises penance there. For a thousand divine years he worships Śiva. During the time of his abstract meditation he was burnt by the magnanimous Śiva. On the day of the bright parvan (i.e. the full moon day) the fire resembled a white mountain. All those remaining with Cupid were burnt and they lived at Kusumeśvara. After a thousand divine years the great lord (Śiva) was pleased with them. Rudra, the giver of boons, was, along with Umā, pleased with them. All they remaining on the bank of Narmada were liberated. By the power of that holy place they again attained godhead. ‘O Mahādeva, let the holy place be excellent by your favour.’ The holy place has extended up to half a yojana all around. A man, given to fasting, having bathed at that holy place is honoured in the form of Cupid in Rudra’s heaven. Yama, Kāmadeva, Vaiśvānara and Vāyu who had formerly come there, practised penance there only. A man who within the limit of half a yojana from there, near Andhona, not far away from the holy place, bathes, gives gifts, (gives) food (to brāhmaṇas), offers piṇḍas, enters fire, or water, or fasts, is never reborn after dying there. The best man should bathe himself with the water sacred to Tryambaka. The manes of him, who duly offers piṇḍas at the root of Andhona, remain pleased as long as the moon and the sun remain (in the sky). A man or a woman who bathes there when the sun enters the northern solstice, would, (being) pure, live in the abode (of Siddheśvara) (and) the man, would obtain, by worshipping Siddheśvara in the morning, that status of the good which cannot be obtained by (performing) great sacrifices; and during the time of his stay at the holy place, an ugly man becomes handsome. In the mortal world, he becomes the king (of the earth) upto the oceans. (If) he would not see Kṣetrapāla, and the mighty Daṇḍapāla his pilgrimage would be fruitless, (also) by not seeing (i.e. visiting) Karṇakuṇḍala.

122\. Having learnt this fruit of (the visit to) sacred places, all the gods that had assembled there, showered flowers and praised Kusumeśvara.


