+++
title = "030 Hemakuṇḍala and His Two Sons"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1-13. O king, now I shall tell you an old history (i.e., an account). In Kṛtayuga, in the excellent city of Niṣadha, there lived a merchant resembling Kubera and named Hemakuṇḍala. He was of a high descent, of good deeds, a worshipper of deities, brāhmaṇas and fire. He practised agriculture and trade and purchased and sold various (things). He was eagerly engaged in rearing cows, horses and buffaloes etc. He always sold milk, curds, buttermilk, cowdung, grass, wood, fruits, roots, salt, ginger, long pepper, grains, vegetables, oils, garments of various kinds, metals, sugar and molasses. By these and various other means the merchant always earned eight crores of (coins of) gold. Thus he who had great wealth became grey up to his ears. Then thinking in his mind about the transitoriness of the worldly existence, he did acts of piety with (i.e., by spending) the sixth part of that wealth. He fashioned the temple of Viṣṇu and also the abode of Śiva. He got dug a tank, big and resembling an ocean. He also constructed many wells and lakes in many ways. According to his capacity he also put up the grove of (the trees like) vaṭa, aśvattha, mango, kaṅkola, jambu, nimba etc., and also a charming garden. He gave food and drink from sunrise to sunset. In all the four directions outside the city he set up stalls where travellers could drink water. That religious-minded one, always engaged in giving gifts, gave all (kinds of) presents that were well-known in the Purāṇas. He also underwent an expiation for the sins committed during his life (time). He was always engrossed in worshipping deities and guests.

14-27a. When he was living like this two sons were born to him, O king. Their names were well-known as Śrīkuṇḍala and Vikuṇḍala. Having put the responsibility of (managing the affairs of) the house on their heads (i.e., on their shoulders) he went to a forest for (practising) penance. Having propitiated there that great god, the lord who grants boons, he with his body afflicted with penance and with his mind always set upon Vāsudeva (i.e., Viṣṇu), reached Viṣṇu’s heaven, reaching which a man does not regret. O king, both his sons were full of great pride, young, handsome, proud of their wealth. Their character was bad; they were addicted to bad habits; they did not observe religious rites; they did not obey the words of their mother and (other) elderly persons. They had gone astray; they were wicked; they refused (to recognize) their father’s friends. They were engaged in (doing) impious acts; they were wicked; and cohabited with the wives of others. They were engaged in singing and instrumental music, had diversions like playing upon the lute and flute. They were in the company of hundreds of harlots. They sang (songs). (Thus) they then lived. They were surrounded by flatterers. They were skilful (in enjoying) with beautiful women. They put on good dresses; they wore charming garments; they were adorned with pleasing sandal (-paste). They put on fragrant garlands, and the marks of musk. They richly adorned themselves with various ornaments. They put on pearl-necklaces. Here and there they sported with hosts af [of?] elephants, horses and chariots. They indulged in drinking wine; they were infatuated by sexual union with the wives of others. They wasted their father’s money. They gave (i.e., squandered) a lakh (of coins). Always intent upon enjoyment of pleasures they remained in their own house. In this way they used that wealth by spending it in improper ways. They gave that wealth to unworthy recipients (like) harlots, rogues, actors, wrestlers, singers and bards, like seed sown in a saline land. They did not give it to worthy recipients, nor did they offer it into the mouth of a brāhmaṇa. They did not worship Viṣṇu, the sustainer of the creatures, destroying all sins.

27b-35. The wealth of both of them was soon exhausted. Then they became very unhappy and were reduced to great poverty. They were lamenting; they were perplexed; they were oppressed with hunger, affliction and grief. When they remained in home, there was nothing that they (could) eat. Due to want of wealth, they, not trusted by their kinsmen, relatives, servants and dependents in that city, were deserted. O king, then they started stealing (things) in that city. Afraid of the king and the people, they then went out of their city. Troubled by all they lived in a forest. The two fools always killed with sharp arrows rubbed with poison many birds, boars, deer and rohita (a species of deer), hares, porcupines, iguanas, and many other beasts of prey. The two very strong ones always enjoyed in the company of bhilas. O you subduer of your enemies, thus they ate fleshy food, forbidden food. Some time one reached a mountain; the other one went to a forest. The elder one was killed by a tiger; the younger one was bitten by a snake. Thus, O king, one day the most sinful ones died.

36-41. Then they were bound by the wicked messengers of Yama and were taken to Yama’s abode. Going there, all the messengers spoke (about) both of them to Yama: “O Dharmarāja, these two men have been brought here by your order. Give orders to (us) your servants. (Please) be favourable (and tell us) what we should do.” Having spoken to Citragupta, Yama then spoke to the messengers: “O brave ones, one should be taken to the hell and tortured. The other one should be placed in heaven where there are excellent enjoyments.” Having heard that order of Yama, the prompt messengers threw the elder one into the terrible Raurava (hell), O king. A certain excellent messenger among them said (these) sweet words: “O Vikuṇḍala, come with me. I shall give you (i.e., lead you to) heaven. Enjoy (there) very divine pleasures which you have earned by means of your deeds.”


