+++
title = "035 Greatness of Kapardin"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1-2a. Now there is another excellent Liṅga, (called) Kapardīśvara. O king, having bathed there according to proper rites and offered oblations to manes, one is freed from all sins and obtains salvation and enjoyment.

2b-11. Then there is another holy place called Piśācamocana. There is the wonderful (form of) god that gives salvation and that removes all blemishes. A demon taking up a terrible form of a tiger went to the excellent Kapardīśvara to eat up a female deer. There she with her heart frightened again and again circumambulated (the deity). Running and extremely perpflexed [perplexed?] she came under the sway of the tiger. That very strong tiger having torn her with sharp nails went to another place after having noticed the best sages. That young female deer almost dead looked in front of Kapardīśa, like a great flame, lustrous like the moon in the sky. (She appeared) to have three eyes, dark blue throat, and with her hair on the head marked with the moon, to have mounted upon a bull, and surrounded by men like her only. The (divine) beings roaming in the sky, showered upon her flowers on all sides. Being turned into one of the female chiefs of Śiva’s attendants she vanished just at that moment only. Seeing that great wonder the gods and others praised it. That is the Liṅga of Śiva called Kapardīśvara, the best one. By merely remembering, it a man gets quickly free from his sins. All blemishes like passion, anger, and difficulties of the residents of Vārāṇasī perish by worshipping Kapardīśvara.

12-14. Therefore one should always see the excellent Kapardīśvara, one should worship (the Phallus) with great care, and should extol (the lord) with Vedic hymns. There is no doubt that the meditating saints of tranquil minds who always meditate (upon the lord), attain perfection within six months. By worshipping this deity sins like killing a brāhmaṇa perish, since one who has bathed in the tank called Piśācamocana obtains peace.

15-24. Formerly, a brāhmaṇa ascetic of a severe vow and known as Śaṅkukarṇa worshipped Śiva at that holy place. He constantly muttered (the names of) Rudra of the form of Brahman. The meditating saint taking the vow devoutly worshipped there the lord by means of flowers, incense etc., hymns, salutation and circumambulations. Once he saw a hungry ghost with its body covered with bones and skin, sighing repeatedly, that had come there. Having seen him the best sage full of great pity said (to him): “Who are you? From what region have you come to this region?” The ghost oppressed by hunger, said (these) words to him: “In my former existence I was a brāhmaṇa having wealth and grains. I had sons and grandsons and was eager to maintain my family. I did not worship great deities, cows and guests. I never did any small or big (act of) religious merit. Once I saw the revered Viśveśvara having the lord of bulls as his vehicle, touched him, and saluted him. Then after a short time I died. (But) O sage, I did not see (i.e. go to) that very terrible house of Yama. Now, being overpowered by thirst I do not know what is beneficial or otherwise. O lord, if you see some means to emancipate me, (please) do it. Salutation to you. I have sought your refuge (now).”

25-28. Saṅkukarṇa who was thus addressed by the ghost, said to him: “There is no person like you who has done the most meritorious deed, since you have formerly seen Śiva, the lord of the universe. You touched him and again saluted him. Who else in the world is like you? Due to the ripening of the deed you have come to this region. Being calm, quickly cast off this vile body here only.”

29-34. That ghost, thus addressed by that kind sage, remembered after making his mind tranquil, Kapardīśvara, the best, three-eyed god, and bathed there. Then, he having bathed there near the sage and endowed with divine ornaments died and was seen in an aeroplane resembling the sun and had his charming head marked with the moon. With Rudras living in heaven and being looked after by the meditating saints along with the unbounded Vālakhilyas,[^1] he shines like the full god, the sun at the time of rising. Siddhas and hosts of gods praise him in the heaven. Charming celestial nymphs danced. Gandharvas, Vidyādharas and kinnaras etc. showered flowers mixed with water. Being praised by the groups of the best sages, having secured knowledge by the favour of the lord, he entered that best orb full of the three (gods) where Rudra shines. Seeing the ghost liberated the sage, being pleased in mind, thought about Rudra, the only wise one, saluted Agni, and praised that Kapardin.

[^1]:  Vālakhilyas—This is the name of a class of sages of the size of a thumb. Sixty thousand were produced from Brahmā’s body and surround the chariot of the sun.

## *Śaṅkukarṇa said*:

35\. I approach you, Kapardin, greater than the great, the protector, the only ancient man, the lord of deep meditation, the giver of desired objects, the sun, the fire, and the one mounted upon a tawny bull.

36-44. I seek the refuge of you, the essence of Brahman, placed in my heart, full of gold, possessing miraculous power, the beginning and the end (of the world), Rudra, staying in heaven, a great sage, of the nature of Brahman and pure, endowed with a thousand feet, eyes and heads of a thousand forms, and (remaining) beyond darkness. I salute the eternal Śambhu, the extreme limit of Brahman, the revered one, the lord, the lord of Hiraṇyagarbha, the three-eyed one, and also seek the refuge of (you), wherefrom the world has originated, and unto whom it will perish (i.e. merge), and by whom, i.e. Śiva, this entire (world) is pervaded. I salute you, who are without any characteristic mark, whose form cannot be seen, who are your own lord and of that of the soul, who are of a uniform nature, who are beyond Brahman, and who are the highest lord, other than whom nothing exists; whom the meditating saints who have become one with the highest soul, giving up meditation along with mystical letter forming the essential part of the hymn, after securing concentration see. I always bow to him who is beyond Brahman and of the highest form. I always salute him who is beyond Brahman, who has no qualification like a name, whose form cannot be seen. I seek your shelter, of the self-born one. I always salute your form which is beyond Brahman, which is not one, which, those engaged in Vedic recitals see to be without a body, to be without distinctions, to be one along with the knowledge of Brahman, from which Pradhāna (or Prakṛti) and the ancient Puruṣa obtain lustre, (which) the gods salute. I salute him, remaining in the lustre, the huge time, which is your form. I always seek the refuge of Guheśa; I approach the ancient Sthāṇu (i.e. Śiva), living on the mountain. I approach Śiva, Hari, (Śiva) having the moon on his head, the trident-holder. I seek your refuge.

45-47. Thus having praised the revered Kapardin, Śaṅkukarṇa also prostrated himself on the ground and uttered the highest (syllable) Om. At that moment only the great Phallus of Śiva appeared there. It was knowledge, joy, and very much like the fire having a crore of flames. Śaṅkukarṇa’s soul was liberated. His pure soul moved everywhere. It merged into that pure Phallus. (Thus) a great wonder took place.

48-50. I have thus told you the secret and the greatness of Kapardin. Nobody knows it. Even a learned man is deluded through ignorance. He who would daily listen to this account that destroys sins, would with his soul being purified due to having abandoned sins, secure proximity with Rudra. He who being pure would always recite this hymn (called) Brahmapāra in the morning, noon and evening would secure the highest contemplation.



