+++
title = "036 The Greatness of Madhyameśa"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1-2a. O great king, at Vārāṇasī, there is the best (place called) Madhyameśa. At that place that great lord Mahādeva always rejoices with the goddess (i.e. Pārvatī) and is surrounded by the Rudras. Formerly the universal god Hṛṣīkeśa, Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī, lived there for a year (and was) always surrounded by devotees of Śiva.

2b-5a. With his entire body smeared with dust, and intent upon studying Rudra(-hymn), and observing the vow of the devotee of Śiva, Hari (i.e. Kṛṣṇa) worshipped Śiva. All those many disciples of him, intent upon celibacy, got knowledge from his mouth and saw Maheśvara.

5b-9a. That great revered lord Nīlalohita (i.e. Śiva), the giver of boons, directly gave an excellent boon to Kṛṣṇa. “Those devotees of meine [mine?] who worship Govinda with proper rites, will have the knowledge belonging to Śiva, which is full of the world. Those who are devoted to me, should salute him, should worship him and should meditate upon him. There is no doubt that by my favour they will have no birth. The sin like killing a brāhmaṇa etc. of those who here see after bathing the lord of gods, the trident-holder, quickly perishes.

9b-10a. Those mortals who, though engaged in sinful acts, die here, also go to that highest place. No doubt should be raised in this matter.

10b-12. Those wise men who after bathing in Gaṅgā, after having worshipped the lord Mahādeva, Madhyameśvara, (obtain) knowledge, (practise) penance, and offer śrāddha and piṇḍa at this place are blessed. Each one of these rites that are performed, purifies (the members of his) family up to the seventh descendant. The fruit that a man gets here is tenfold of the fruit that he gets by bathing at Sannihati, when the Sun is eclipsed by Rāhu.

13\. O great king, I have thus told you about the greatness of Madhyameśvara. He who listens to it with great devotion, goes to the highest position.


