+++
title = "037 Other Holy Places of Vārāṇasī"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1\. O Yudhiṣṭhira, O great king, there are also other holy places situated in Vārāṇasī. Listen to (the description of) them.

2-9. The holy place superior to Prayāga (the place of the confluence of Gaṅgā and Yamunā) is the auspicious Prayāga (a holy place at Vārāṇasī). Similarly there is a holy place called Viśvatīrtha, and also the excellent holy place Tālatīrtha. There is the holy place called Ākāśa, so also the excellent one called Ārṣabha (i.e. sacred to Ṛṣabha). There is the great holy place called Sunīla, and the excellent holy place called Gaurītīrtha. So also there is the holy place called Prājāpatya and there is the (holy place called) Svargadvāra. There is also the (holy place called) Jambukeśvara and the excellent Dharma. The Gayātīrtha is a great holy place, so also Mahānadī is a holy place. Nārāyaṇa is a great holy place and Vāyutīrtha is excellent. Jñānatīrtha is a great secret place, and Vārāhatīrtha is excellent. Yamatīrtha is auspicious; so also Sammūrtika is holy. O great king, there is the Agnitīrtha, and there is also the excellent holy place Kalaśeśvara. So also there are (the holy places called) Nāgatīrtha, Somatīrtha and Sūryatīrtha. Then there is the very secret (holy place) called Parvata; so also there is the excellent Maṇikarṇya. Ghaṭotkaca is the best holy place, so also there is the Śrītīrtha (sacred to) the Grandsire. Gaṅgātīrtha is (sacred) to the lord of gods. So also Yayātitīrtha is excellent. There is the sacred place holy to Kapila; so also there is (the holy place called) Someśa; so also there is (the holy place called) Brahmatīrtha.

10-12. When Brahmā had formerly come there to install the ancient Liṅga, Viṣṇu installed that Liṅga of the lord at that time. Having bathed there and having come (to Viṣṇu), Brahmā said to Viṣṇu: “I had brought this Liṅga. Why did you instal it?” Viṣṇu said to him: “My devotion to Rudra is stronger than yours. Therefore I have installed the Liṅga. It will be named after you.”

13\. Similarly there is the holy place called Bhūteśvara, so also there is Dharmasamudbhava. Then there is the auspicious Gandharvatīrtha, and there is the holy place called Vāhneya (i.e. sacred to Agni).

14-19. O Yudhiṣṭhira, there are holy places called Daurvāsika, Vyomatīrtha, Candratīrtha, Cintāṅgadeśvaratīrtha, and the auspicious Vidyādhareśvara. There are (also the holy places called) Kedāratīrtha, Ugra, and the excellent Kālañjara; so also Sārasvata, Prabhāsa, and the auspicious Rudrakarmahrada. There is the great holy place (called) Kokila, and there is the holy place called Mahālaya. So also there is the excellent holy place Hiraṇyagarbha. There is also the excellent holy place (called) Goprekṣa. Then there are the holy places (like) Upaśānta, Śiva, the excellent Vyāghreśvara, the great holy place Trilocana, so also Lokārka and Uttara. There is the holy place (called) Kapālamocana, destroying (the sin of) killing a brāhmaṇa. (Then) there is the very holy place (called) Śukreśvara, so also there is the excellent Ānandapura. These are the holy places situated in Vārāṇasī. Even during crores of kalpas, it would not be possible to describe them in detail.


