+++
title = "044 The Fruit of Bathing in the Confluence at Prayāga"

+++
 

## *Mārkaṇdeya said*:

1-20a. O king, hear again the greatness of Prayāga, having heard which a man is freed from all sins. There is no doubt about it. That (famous) Mānasa lake is on the left bank of Gaṅgā. Having fasted (there) for three nights a man would obtain all his desired objects. A man obtains that fruit when he remembers the holy place, which he would obtain by giving a cow, land, or gold. A man who, with or without a desire, dies in Gaṅgā, lives in heaven after death, and does not see (i.e. go to) hell. He is awakened by the music of that host of celestial nymphs from his sleep. He goes in an aeroplane to which swans and cranes are yoked. O lord of kings, he enjoys for many years—six thousand years. Then being deprived of heaven and having fallen from there due to (the fruit of) his acts being exhausted, he is born in a family rich with gold, jewels and pearls. There are sixty thousand sixty hundred holy places. They go to the confluence of Gaṅgā and Yamunā in the month of Māgha. That fruit which one gets by properly giving away a thousand cows is had by bathing for three days at Prayāga in the month of Māgha. He who would practise the vow of the five fires between (i.e. at the confluence of) Gaṅgā and Yamunā, is defectless in limbs, is free from diseases and has the five senses (intact). For as many thousand years as the number of pores of hair are there on his body, he is honoured in heaven. Then having fallen from heaven he would be the lord of Jambudvīpa. The man enjoying many pleasures resorts to that holy place. He who would enter water at the confluence well-known in the world, is freed from all sins as the Moon eclipsed by Rāhu (becomes free). He obtains (i.e. goes to) the world of Soma and rejoices with Soma. Being served by sages and gandharvas he obtains (i.e. lives in) heaven for sixty thousand sixty hundred years. Fallen (from there) he is born in an affluent family. The man who with his head down and feet up would drink (i.e. take in) the flame, is honoured for a hundred thousand years in heaven. Having fallen from there, O lord of kings, he becomes a performer of agnihotra. Having enjoyed many pleasures, the man resorts to that holy place. He who cuts off his body and offers (the pieces of) it to the birds (is honoured in heaven). Hear the fruit of him (i.e. which he gets), who (i.e. whose body) is enjoyed by birds. For a hundred thousand years he is honoured in the world of Soma. Then having fallen from heaven he becomes (i.e. is born as) a pious, virtuous, handsome, learned king, having a very lovable body. Having enjoyed many pleasures, he again resorts to that holy place.

20b-22. On the left bank of Yamunā, and to the south of Prayāga, there is said to be a very holy place (called) Ṛṇapramo-cana. Staying there for a night, he is free from all debts. He obtains (i.e. goes to) the world of the Sun, and would always be free from debt.


