+++
title = "046 More about Merits Derived from Pilgrimage"

+++
 

## *Yudhiṣṭhira said*:

1-5. I have heard what Brahmā told and what gives religious merit, in the Purāṇa. There are thousands and hundreds and millions of holy places. All these are auspicious and pure and (are) said (to lead to) the highest position. Naimiṣa is meritorious on the earth and Puṣkara in the Intermediate Space; so also is Prayāga for the people, and Kurukṣetra also excels. How do you praise one (only) leaving all (others)? This is said to be unauthoritative, unbelievable and not good. How do you speak approvingly of divine and highest position, and pleasures as desired, and great merit through little yoga? Tell me about (i.e. remove) this doubt of mine according as you have seen and heard.

## *Mārkaṇḍeya said*:

6-14a. What is unbelievable should not be told. It may be actually seen by a man having faith (but) with his mind smitten with sin. One who has no faith, one who is impure, one who has given up auspicious practices—all these are sinners. Therefore I spoke (like) this. Listen to (the description of) the greatness of Prayāga, as seen and heard about (by me). There will be (i.e. it will contain) what is seen and not seen and any other possible facts, O king, which I formerly saw or heard about. One’s application (or path) is honoured (only) after regarding the sacred texts as authoritative. There (i.e. while doing so) (if) someone else is afflicted, one should not have (recourse to) such a path. Men obtain (the right) path after thousands of births, since by a thousand applications men obtain the (right) path. He who gives all jewels to brāhmaṇas (obtains yoga), (for) by that gift given (to brāhmaṇas), men obtain application. All this happens in the case of him who dies at Prayāga, and not otherwise. I shall tell principally to them who have faith, O descendant of Bharata. Since it is seen in all beings, everywhere, Brahman is not something which can be described.

14b-18a. As Brahman is worshipped among all beings everywhere, in the same way Prayāga is worshipped by the wise in all the worlds. (It) is worshipped (like this). O Yudhiṣṭhira, this is the truth about the lord of holy places. Even Brahmā always remembers Prayāga, the best holy place. Having reached (this) lord of the holy places he does not desire anything else. Who, having obtained godhead, desires manhood? From this inference only, O Yudhiṣṭhira, you will know whether I have told you what is meritorious or non-meritorious.

## *Yudhiṣṭhira said*:

18b-19a. I have heard what you told. I am repeatedly amazed. How can it be attained by yoga and heaven by (one’s) acts? He gets pleasures and (comes to) the earth as the fruit of (certain) acts. I am asking about those acts due to which he again gets (i.e. comes to) the earth.

## *Mārkaṇḍeya said*:

19b-26. O king, hear by which acts (he comes to) the earth. O king, such men as censure a cow, fire, brāhmaṇa, sacred texts, gold, water, women, mother, father, do not have an upward going. Thus spoke Prajāpati. Thus yoga is had. The (highest) place is very difficult to obtain. The men who commit sins go to terrible hell. Those who first take away an elephant, a horse, a cow, a bull, jewels, pearls, gold in the absence (of the owner), and later give gifts, do not go to heaven, where the donors enjoying pleasures (live). The mean ones united with (i.e. doing) such acts are roasted in hell. Thus O Yudhiṣṭhira, (I have told about) yoga, pious acts and a donor. Whether it is true or not, or whether its fruit is there or not, I shall offer the explanation, so that he can on his own obtain (them).


