+++
title = "047 Prayāga Again"

+++
 

## *Mārkaṇḍeya said*:

1-5. O king, hear again (about) the greatness of Prayāga. There are many holy places and other auspicious mountains like Naimiṣa, Puṣkara, Gotīrtha, Sindhusāgara, Kurukṣetra, Gayā, and Gaṅgāsāgara. The wise say that ten thousand holy places and thirty crore others are always situated at Prayāga. There are three fire-vessels, from which Gaṅgā, led by all (other) holy places has set out from Prayāga. The goddess (Yamunā), the daughter of the Sun is well-known in the three worlds. Gaṅgā causing people to enjoy, stays (here) with Yamunā.

6-11. Prayāga, said to be the hip of the earth, is in between (i.e. at the confluence of) Gaṅgā and Yamunā. The thirty and a half crores which Vāyu has proclaimed, do not deserve (i.e. are not equal to) even its sixteenth part. Whatever is in heaven, on the earth (or) in the atmosphere—all that is said to be Gaṅgā (only). Prayāga, Samādhisthāna, the two (nāgas) Kambala and Aśvatara, and the (holy place) which is (called) Bhogavatī, are the altar of Prajāpati. O Yudhiṣṭhira, gods and sacrifices are there in an embodied form. The sages having penance as their wealth, worship Prayāga. Gods and kings having much wealth, perform sacrifices (there). None is more auspicious than that in the three worlds, O descendant of Bharata. Due to its prowess, it is more powerful than all (other) holy places, O lord. There are ten thousand holy places and thirty crore other holy places.

12-20. The truth is, that place where the illustrious Gaṅgā is (flowing) is a penance-grove. That (region) which resorts to the bank of Gaṅgā, should be known as the land of siddhas. A man should whisper this into the ears of the twice-born, the good, his own son, friends, or the disciple who follows him. This is blessed, this leads to heaven, this should be practised, this is auspicious, this is meritorious, this is charming, this is holy, this is the best course of conduct. This is the secret of the sages, which destroys all sins. A brāhmaṇa, meditating on it and having remembered it would obtain purity. He who, always being pure hears about this holy place everyday, obtains (the faculty) of remembering his former briths [births?] and rejoices in heaven. These holy places are reached by the good who follow the desires of the wise. O descendant of Kuru, bathe at the holy places. Do not have a crooked mind. Being asked by you, I have properly told it to you. All the manes and the great-grandsires that are liberated do not deserve (i.e. are not equal to) (even) the sixteenth part of Prayāga. Thus the (path of) knowledge and (that of) yoga and a holy place, O Yudhiṣṭhira, are secured after great trouble. Then they go to the highest position. People by remembering Prayāga go to heaven.


