+++
title = "049 Kṛṣṇa Recommends Pilgrimage to Prayāga"

+++
 

## *Sūta said*:

1-3. All the Pāṇḍavas bent upon meritorious acts, along with their brothers, saluted the brāhmaṇas and offered oblations to their (dead) elders and deities. Kṛṣṇa also at that time came there in a moment. All the Pāṇḍavas together honoured that Mādhava (i.e. Kṛṣṇa). All the noble ones, along with Kṛṣṇa, consecrated Yudhiṣṭhira, Dharma’s son, on the kingdom (i.e. the throne).

4\. In the meanwhile (i.e. at this time) only, the great-souled Mārkaṇḍeya, then saying: ‘May it be well with you’, came in a moment to the hermitage.

5\. The pious Yudhiṣṭhira, Dharma’s son, too, along with his brothers, gave him a great gift.

6\. He who, getting up at daybreak, recites or listens to this, is freed from all sins and he goes to Viṣṇu’s heaven.

## *Vāsudeva said*:

7-17. Do my words (i.e. as I tell you). I am speaking out of affection for you. Being free from affliction at Prayāga, be always engaged in (performing) sacrifices. O lord of kings, O Yudhiṣṭhira, ever remembering Prayāga along with us, you yourself will obtain the eternal heaven. The man who goes to Prayāga, (and) who lives (there), with his soul being purified of all sins, goes to heaven. He who has turned away from accepting gifts, who is pleased, controlled and pure, who is free from self-conceit, obtains the fruit of (a visit to) a holy place. O lord of kings, so also he who does not get angry, who speaks the truth, and who has a firm resolve, who looks upon (other) beings as himself, obtains the fruit of (a visit to) a holy place. The sages, so also the gods have recommended sacrifices according to (proper) order. O king, a poor man cannot (afford) to have (i.e. to perform) a sacrifice. A sacrifice requires many implements, and many activities for its preparation are necessary. It is sometimes obtained (i.e. performed) by various rich or wealthy men. O king, it can be performed by rich, wise men. Then they are united with (i.e. attain) meritorious fruits of the sacrifice. O king, O best of the Bharatas, understand this great secret of the sages. Visiting holy places is meritorious. It is even superior to (the performance of) sacrifices. O best of men, ten crores of holy places, so also thirty crores of other (holy places) will go to (i.e. exist) in Gaṅgā in the month of Māgha. Enjoying the kingdom free from vexation, be comfortable, O great king. O lord of kings, you will, especially as a sacrificer, again see (me).


