+++
title = "059 Rules of Conduct for a Sannyāsī"

+++
 

## *Vyāsa said*:

1\. Having thus lived in the stage of an anchorite for the third part of his life, he should gradually pass into the fourth stage of life in renunciation.

2-5. Having established the fires in the soul a twice-born would be a recluse. When he, engaged in the practice of abstract meditation, calm, intent on getting the knowledge of Brahman, has detachment in his mind for all objects, then (only) he should think of renouncing (the world). If reverse is the case, then he would fall. Having accomplished the Prājāpatya sacrifice (by giving away his own property) and the fire-sacrifice, he, being restrained, having put on a white or red garment should resort to the stage of the ascetic. Some are ascetics (following the path) of knowledge; some are ascetics (engaged in the study) of the Vedas; others are ascetics (following the path) of action. (Thus ascetics are said to be of three kinds.)

6-20a. He, who is free from everything, who is free from the pairs (like pleasure and pain), who is fearless and who is well-settled in himself is called *jñāna-sannyāsī*. He, who would be desireless and possessionless and would study the Vedas only, and desires salvation and has his senses controlled is called *Veda-sannyāsī*. The twice-born who having had fire in his possession, is intent on dedicating himself to Brahman and on performing great sacrifices, should be known as *karma-sannyāsī*. Of these three, the *jñāna-sannyāsī* is regarded as superior. For him, the wise one, there is nothing to be done nor does he have any mark. Free from the feeling of mine-ness, being fearless, calm, free from the pairs, subsisting on leaves, wearing an old strip to cover his private parts, or remaining naked he is engaged in meditation. He, a celibate, with his diet controlled, should fetch his food from the village. Being indifferent and desireless he should remain taking delight in the supreme spirit. He should move in this world for happiness with the help of his own soul (i.e. all alone). He should not desire death, nor should he desire life. He should wait for death only as a servant waits for (his master’s order). He should not study; should not engage himself (in any pursuit); should never listen (to anything). A meditating saint, who thus looks upon knowledge as the highest thing is fit for absorption into Brahman. The wise one should have one garment (only) or a small strip to cover (his private parts); should be clean-shaven or should have a lock of hair on the crown of his head; should be tridaṇḍī and should have no possession; (or) should put on a red garment and always engage himself in deep meditation. He should live near a village, at the root of a tree or in a temple. He should be equal to his enemy or friend, so also (look equally upon) respect and insult. He should always subsist by begging, and should never eat from one place. For an ascetic who, through delusion or for some other reason, eats from one place only, no expiation is seen in the religious texts. He should be detached from love or hatred; should look equally upon a clod or stone or gold; should abstrain from harming creatures, should observe the vow of silence and should be fully desireless. He should plant his foot kept pure by sight (i.e. watching that no impurity is contracted); should drink after it is filtered through a cloth; he should talk words that are purified by truth; and should behave in a way which is approved by his conscience.

20b-27a. Except in the rainy season a mendicant should not stay at one place (for a long time). Bathing everyday and being pure and virtuous, having a water-pot in his hand, he should always be engrossed in celibacy and be interested in living in a forest. If he is engaged in (reading) scriptures (leading to) salvation, is invested with the sacred thread, has his senses controlled, if he is free from religious hypocrisy and pride, and is free from censuring others and from wickedness, is endowed with the quality of the knowledge of the soul, he would obtain salvation. He should constantly meditate on the eternal deity called ‘Om’. After having bathed and sipped water according to the proper rite and being pure, he, invested with the sacred thread, with his mind tranquil, with kuśas in his hand, with his red garment washed, with the hair (on his body) covered with ashes, should mutter hymns about the principal sacrifice or the presiding deity or the highest soul or whatever is said in the Upaniṣads. Or the restrained ascetic, being a celibate, should live among his sons. He should everyday study the Vedas, (then) he goes to the highest position.

27b-31. These are his special vows: harmlessness, truth, non-stealing, celibacy, austerities, forgiveness, kindness, and contentment; or he should, having faith in the Upaniṣadic knowledge and being calm, and having bathed, should perform the five sacrifices everyday; and desiring alms, and being tranquil, should, from time to time, mutter the sacrificial hymns. He should everyday do sacred study, and should mutter the Gāyatrī-hymn at both the twilights. He should constantly meditate upon the absolute lord. He should always avoid food from one place, so also lust, wrath and possessions; he should wear one garment, or two garments; he should have a lock of hair on the crown of his head; he should be invested with a sacred thread; the wise man having the tridaṇḍa in his hand goes to that highest Brahman.


