+++
title = "062 The Merit of Reciting the Padma Purāṇa, Svargakhaṇḍa"

+++
 

## *Sūta said*:

1-8a. Thus is the greatness of that highest lord Viṣṇu, taking up many forms, (Viṣṇu—) who is the cause of complete liberation in the world. One of the forms is the great *Padma* (*Purāṇa*). The *Brahma* (*Purāṇa*) is the head of Viṣṇu only. His heart is called *Padma*. The *Viṣṇu* (*Purāṇa*) is his right arm. The *Śaiva* (*Purāṇa*) is the left arm of the great lord. The *Bhāgavata* (*Purāṇa*) is said to be his thighs. The *Nāradīya* (*Purāṇa*) is his navel. The *Mārkaṇḍeya* (*Purāṇa*) is his right foot; the *Agni* (*Purāṇa*) is said to be (his) left foot. The *Bhaviṣya* (*Purāṇa*) is the right knee of the magnanimous Viṣṇu only. The (Purāṇa) called *Brahmavaivarta* is said to be his left knee. The *Liṅga* (*Purāṇa*) is said to be the right ankle and the *Varāha* is the left ankle. The *Skanda Purāṇa* is the hair, and the *Vāmana (Purāṇa*) is said to be his skin. The *Kūrma* (*Purāṇa*) is said to be his back; the *Matsya* is said to his fat. The *Garuḍa* (*Purāṇa*) is said to be his marrow; the *Brahmāṇḍa* is said to be his bone(s). Thus Viṣṇu was having the Purāṇas as parts of his body. *Padma* there (i.e. in the body) is the heart, having heard which a man obtains nectar (i.e. immortality).

8b-9. God Viṣṇu himself became (i.e. turned himself into) this *Padma Puraṇa*, having taught one chapter of which a man is freed from all sins. There (i.e. of the *Padma Purāṇa*) this *Svargakhaṇḍa* gives the fruit of the entire *Padma*. Having heard the *Svargakhaṇḍa* even those who are great sinners are freed from sins as the serpents are free from their skins.

10-18. A man who hears this first (or best) *Svargakhaṇḍa* gets the same fruit even if he is extremely wicked and expelled from all religions. As a man having bathed at Prayāga in the month of Māgha is free from sins, similarly he would be free from sins by hearing (the *Adi Svargakhaṇḍa*). He who has heard, and made (others) hear this *Ādikhaṇḍa* has given gold (equal to his own) weight, and has given the entire earth. He has given a gift to a poor man of the debt which he incurred; he has repeatedly recited the thousands of the names of Viṣṇu; he has studied all the Vedas, and has similarly performed all rites; he has settled teachers by giving them livelihood. O brāhmaṇas, he has also granted fearlessness to the people that were frightened; he has sought the consent of the virtuous, wise and pious persons. He has given very cold (water) between (i.e. during the period between) the sign of Aries and the sign of Cancer; he has also cast his life for brāhmaṇas and cows; He, the wise one, has also performed other good deeds.

19-25. Having well studied (i.e. if he studies well) the *Svargakhaṇḍa*, he obtains many pleasures. He, who has slept well, is awakened by women in his harem, by means of good (i.e. sweet) sounds of small bells and with sweet words. He enjoys half of Indra’s seat and would live for a long time in Indra’s heaven. From there he would go to the Sun’s abode and then to the world of the Moon. Then enjoying pleasures in the abode of the Seven Sages, he goes to Dhruva, thence to Brahma’s world, and obtains a lustrous body. Having secured knowledge there only, he goes to (i.e. obtains) salvation. The wise one would live with the good, and would bathe at a holy place. The man would talk pious words and would listen to holy texts. (Among them) *Padma* (i.e. the *Padma Purāṇa*) is a great holy text, and gives the fruit of all the Vedas. In it *Svargakhaṇḍa* gives great religious merit. O people, if you want to cross easily the waves of longings, then resort to Viṣṇu, salute Viṣṇu, the only excellent god; you will go to worlds of very pure pleasures. Listen and utter the incomparable name of Viṣṇu. Obtain your desired object s.


