+++
title = "002 Nārāyaṇa Grants Boons to Rudra"

+++
 

## *Maheśa said*:

1-8a. There are one lakh and twenty-five thousand mountains. In the midst of them stands the very holy, excellent Badarikāśrama where, O Nārada, lives Nara-Nārāyaṇa. I shall now tell (you about) his nature and lustre. O brāhmaṇa, two men, of the form of Kṛṣṇa and called Nara and Nārāyaṇa, live on the peak of the Himālaya. One man is white; the other one is black. Those striving (to reach) the Himalaya go along that path (and reach them). The great lord is of a tawny and fair complexion and has matted hair. This is Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa, the origin of the world and the great lord. He has four arms; he is great; is rich (or has Lakṣmī); is manifest; is unmanifest; and is ancient. O you of a good vow, in the period of the summer solstice a great worship takes place there. (Then) for six months no worship is offered. The (region) is then covered with snow till the period of the winter solstice sets in. Therefore, such a deity was never there seen in the past nor will ever be in future.

8b-12. Gods live there; so also the hermitages of the sages are there. The oblations to Agni are made, the Vedas (are recited, and so) the sound (of their recital) is always heard there. A man should see the deity; it destroys (the sin of) a crore murders. A man should bathe where there is Alakanandā-Gaṅgā (confluence). He is free from a great sin after bathing there. There is no doubt that the god, the lord of the universe, dwells there. O brāhmaṇa, on one occasion I practised good (i.e. severe) penance (there). Then god Nārāyaṇa who favours his devotees, who is the immutable Puruṣa, who is actually the god having Garuḍa as his banner, was very much pleased, and said to me: “O you of a good vow, ask for a boon”.

## *Śrī Nārāyaṇa said*:

13\. O god, whatever desire you have, I shall fulfil it. You are the lord of Kailāsa; you are actually Rudra, the protector of the universe.

## *Rudra said*:

14-18. O god Janārdana, you are well-pleased. I shall completely accept (the boons). If you desire to grant boons, then grant me two boons. Let me always have devotion to you. I shall be (i.e. let me be) the chief among the devotees. Let all people say: ‘This one is a constant devotee’. O lord, through your favour I shall be the giver of salvation. I shall grant (salvation) to those people who will resort to me. There is no doubt about this. In the world I shall be famous as Viṣṇu’s devotee. O lord, let him whom I (will) grant a boon, have salvation. I, having matted hair, and with my body smeared with sacred ash, (would stay) near you. By the grace of your feet I shall be well-known in the world.


