+++
title = "003 Jālandhara Is Born and Blessed by Brahmā"

+++
 

## *Sūta said*:

1-6. Once Nārada went to the Kāmya forest to see the Pāṇḍavas emaciated due to grief. They properly received the brāhmaṇa. Then saluting the greatest sage, Yudhiṣṭhira said: “O venerable one, due to which act (of ours) have we fallen into this ocean of distress?” To him the sage said, “O son of Pāṇḍu, give up your grief. Which man is happy in this mundane existence which is an assemblage of pleasures and pains? Even the lord is not stable. He is troubled by the heaps of bodies. Nobody is free from grief; everyone has to put up with grief, since (even) the Sun’s body is seized by Rāhu. Rāhu’s head is also cut off by Viṣṇu at the time of enjoying (i.e. drinking) nectar. That god holding the Śārṅga bow (i.e. god Viṣṇu) also was thrown into the deep ocean by brave Jālandhara. He too was killed by Śiva.”

## *Yudhiṣṭhira said*:

7-8. Who was that brave Jālandhara? Whose son was he? Due to what was he strong? How did the bull-bannered god (Śiva) kill Jālandhara in a battle? O you treasure of penance, tell me all this in detail.

Thus addressed by the king (Yudhiṣṭhira), Nārada told (it).

## *Nārada said*:

9\. O king, listen to the divine tale which destroys the entire stream of sins; so also (listen to) the very wonderful (account of) the battle between Śiva and (Jālandhara) the son of the Ocean.

10-15. Once Indra who was crowded with the bevies of celestial nymphs, who was surrounded by many gods, who was crowded by gandharvas well-versed in the art of (playing upon) the lute, went to praise Śiva. (The celestial nymphs) Rambhā, Tilottamā, Rāmā, Karpūrā, so also Kadalī and Madanā, Bhāratī, Kāmā adorned with all ornaments and other female dancers went into the vicinity of the god (Śiva). Gandharvas, yakṣas, siddhas, so also Nārada and Tumburu, and kinnaras and female kinnaras repeatedly came there. So also Vāyu, Varuṇa, Kubera, the giver of wealth, Yama, Agni, Nirṛti, so also other groups of deities (went there). Indra, seated in an aeroplane, celestial ladies seated in aeroplanes, and (other) gods seated in their own vehicles speedily went to Kailāsa.

16-23a. Then the gods saw that Kailāsa, an excellent mountain, the best among all the mountains, the ornament of the earth as it were. It stood giving pleasure on all sides, (was) pure and (stood) like the heap of superhuman powers. The trees there were the desire-yielding trees. The stones there gave whatever was desired. The mountain looked charming due to pun-nāga, nāga, campā, tilakā, devadāru, aśoka, pāṭala, mango, mandāra (trees). The breezes there carried the fragrance from the adjoining forest. The breezes from the Malaya (mountain) became crippled on account of a great movement. The wells there had crystal staircases, and their water was clean and deep. The lotuses (in them) resembling gold had clung to the emerald-like stalks. There the brightness of the white lotuses shone in all directions. The wells there were beautiful with white lotuses, and were covered with rubies. They were decked with green gems and were, on all sides, covered with the gomeda[^1] (gems). They were constructed with ruby-stones, and were beautified with various minerals. They saw the Kailāsa mountain, more beautiful than heaven, and fashioned superior to it.

[^1]:  Gomeda: A gem brought from the Himālayas and the Indus, described as of four different colours, viz. white. pale, yellow-red, and dark-blue.

23b-30a. Seeing that greatest mountain Kailāsa, they were amazed. Indra and those deities got down from their aeroplanes. Then having come to Nandin, the door-keeper, they spoke (these) words: “O you best among the excellent attendants, listen to these good words: Quickly inform respectfully the lord of gods that the chief of gods (Indra), surrounded by all gods, has come here to dance.” Having heard (these) words of Indra, Nandin said to Śiva: “O lord, this lord of gods, Indra, has come here with all (deities) to dance.” Then (Śiva) said to him: “Quickly bring (in) the lord of Śacī (i.e. Indra).” Then Nandin brought in Indra along with them. He (i.e. Indra) seeing god Śiva, having the bull as his banner, praised him. All the female dancers like Rambhā gladly danced there, near Śiva, with (i.e. to the accompaniment of) tabors, lutes and (other) musical instruments. Others, holding bell-metal musical instruments, lutes and large drums performed a zealous dance.

30b-34a. Indra himself excessively performed a beautiful dance, difficult (to be seen even) by gods. The god was delighted, (and) spoke (these) words to Indra: “O best among the gods, I am pleased with you. Ask for a boon”. When the god of gods (i.e. Śiva) spoke like this, Indra who was proud of the might of his arms, said in reply (these) words to Hara (i.e. Śiva): “I ask for that battle in which I shall have a warrior like you (to fight with). O lord, grant me such a battle.” Saying so, and having obtained a boon from lord Śiva, he went out.

34b-37a. When that Indra had left, Śiva said (these) words: “O attendants, listen to my words. The chief of gods has become very proud.” Saying so, Śiva then became angry. Then his wrath manifested itself in a bodily form, and stood before him; (that) wrath, (dark) as dense darkness, then said to Śiva: “Give me the order. O lord, what do (i.e. should) I do for you?”

37b-41a. Then (Śiva) the lord of Umā said: “You, the brave one, (should) after reaching the heavenly river of the Ocean, go and conquer Indra.” That wrath that was told like this, vanished. Those attendants were amazed. When the lord’s ordinance took place, the celestial river due to the heat of her excessive youth, was excited with lust; and seeing her, the lordly Ocean was full of the billows of water. Then, O best king, the union between Gaṅgā and the Ocean took place. The great river, reaching (the Ocean) enjoyed according to her might.

41b-43. Meantime, a mighty, very brave son was born on the great river by the Ocean. O king, the son of the great Ocean, weeping as soon as he was born, shook the earth. The three worlds resounded. Brahmā gave up the position of his fingers formed during profound concentration.

44-45. Meantime (Brahmā) the creator seeing the three worlds alarmed, went to the great Ocean at the words of Indra. Thinking that it was a wonder, he, mounted on his swan, speedily went (to the Ocean). Seeing Brahmā to have arrived, the Ocean offered him worship. Then Brahma said to him: “O Ocean, why do you roar in vain?”

## *The Ocean said*:

46-48a. O lord of gods, I am not roaring. It is my mighty son (that is roaring). (Please) protect my child. To see you is difficult.

“Let the son be seen (i.e. Present the son to Brahmā).” (Thus) he spoke to his very charming wife. She, at the behest of her husband, approached Brahmā along with the son. Putting him on the lap of Brahmā, she saluted his feet.

48b-49. Then seeing the Ocean’s son, Brahmā was indeed amazed. When Brahmā was unable to free from the hand of the child his beard seized by the child, the Ocean laughed and freeing the beard from the child’s hand, seized the child’s hand and left.

50\. The self-born (Brahmā), seeing the child’s valour like that, affectionately called him Jālandhara, and he became Jālandhara by name (i.e. was named Jālandhara).

51-52. The lord of the beings (i.e. Brahmā) affectionately granted him a boon: “This Jālandhara will be unconquerable (even) by gods. By my favour he will enjoy (the lordship of) the heaven along with the nether world.” Speaking like this, Brahmā, mounting upon his swan, hurriedly disappeared.



