+++
title = "007 Lakṣmī Intervenes in the Fight between Viṣṇu and Jālandhara"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1-3a. Then Jālandhara who was angry, spoke to (Indra), the killer of the demon: “*O* you of a mean power, where will you go after killing Bala through trickery?” Speaking thus to Indra, that brave son of the Ocean, cut off, with arrows, his chariot along with the charioteer, horses andflag. Indra, wounded by the arrows, fell after fainting on (i.e. in) his chariot.

3b-9. Seeing that Indra had fallen down, the Ocean’s son roared. Giving up his swoon (i.e. regaining consciousness), Indra discharged his thunderbolt against Jālandhara. Then holding a piece of a mountain the Ocean’s son held the thunderbolt at his side and quickly getting down his chariot, ran to Indra with a desire to seize him in the battle. Then, Indra, abandoning the chariot and remembering Viṣṇu, ran away. The arrogant son of the Ocean got into Indra’s chariot, and making Mātalin the charioteer, went with his desire fulfilled. That mighty-armed Jālandhara went quickly like a cloud after getting into Indra’s chariot (as he liked). Then, Viṣṇu through anger raised his sword (called) Nandaka in the battle, and inciting Garuḍa, having mind’s speed, struck the army of the demons angrily. He, with force, knocked down chariots, horses, elephants and foot-soldiers in thousands.

10-12. Viṣṇu, surrounded (i.e. accompanied) by Kaśyapa’s son performed a fierce feat in the battle. (The battlefield had become) a river, which carried hair, bones, marrow and stream of blood, which was resorted to by goblins, vampires and birds, which was filled with hands, thighs, shanks, missiles and weapons, which was very difficult to cross, which was resorted to by tigers and lordly elephants, which was adorned with blood, entrails, necklaces and armlets. Seeing the army which blocked the beautiful festival to the the rolling eyes, struck by Viṣṇu, all the excellent demons, obstructed Viṣṇu on all sides at the order of Jālandhara.

13-15. There those demons showered volleys of arrows, as clouds shower (water), as bees shower (i.e. moisten) a lotus, as the clouds shower a mountain (with water), or as hosts of birds shower (i.e. moisten) a mango-tree, or as a mass of incense showers (i.e. fills) the sky. In that danger of the battle, Viṣṇu was not visible, so also Garuḍa was not visible. All those great demons who had got into their chariots, roaring with fearful sounds, struck Viṣṇu with all weapons.

16-20. The angry enemy of the demons (i.e. Viṣṇu), with a fierce form, knocked down all of them in the war as wind knocks down a mass of leaves. Then the demon Śailaroman, angrily ran to Viṣṇu. Even the arrows ofViṣṇu were shattered on (i.e. after striking) his body. Śailaroman also struck with arrows the body of Viṣṇu who taking out his sword cut off his head. When the demon’s head was cut off, his trunk, walking on the battlefield seized Garuḍa by his wings with his hands. His head too quickly jumped and stuck fast to his shoulders. Then seeing the fighting of his face even Viṣṇu was amazed.

21-25a. Seeing the head stuck (to the shoulders), Garuḍa fell down on the ground. Again speedily flying, he resorted to the place of the head. Then the powerful Śailaroman snatched off Viṣṇu from Garuḍa. Viṣṇu struck him with the palm of his hand; and he fell dead on the ground. Then Jālandhara said to Khaḍgaroman, his charioteer: “Drive the chariot there, where god Viṣṇu is.” By the words (i.e. the order) of Jālandhara, Khaḍgaroman took the chariot (to that spot). Seeing that Viṣṇu in front of him, the Ocean’s son said: “O Viṣṇu, kill me fearlessly. I shall not kill you, O Mādhava.”

25b-29. Hearing those words of him, Viṣṇu, with his eyes red due to anger, filled (i.e. covered) him with fatal arrows. The Ocean’s brave son, with his body pierced by Viṣṇu, continuously covered Viṣṇu with streams (i.e. volleys) of arrows. Garuḍa, pierced by his hundreds of arrows, fell unconscious. Seeing Garuḍa fallen on the ground (after being struck) by the arrows of the Ocean’s son, Viṣṇu was reminded of his chariot that stood in Vaikuṇṭha. That chariot, without a charioteer, (but) surrounded by horses, came to him. Seeing that chariot yoked with horses on the battlefield the lord was amazed.

30-34. Having brought Garuḍa to consciousness, he appointed him as its driver. That Viṣṇu, putting the crown on his head, the Kaustubha gem on his chest, and prompting the horses to exert, went up to Jālandhara. With (other) gods, he tore the earth with the chariot’s wheel(s); he quickly struck the army of the demons with (his) arrows. Ordered by the lord of gods, Fire burnt the demon’s army (as he was) aided by Wind. At that time, the lord, along with the gods, destroyed the army of the demons. Seeing his army of which a small-portion was left, Jālandhara thought, and then (he) the king said to Śukra:

35-39. “When (even) you, well-versed in incantations, were there, the gods destroyed my army. You are well-known for your lore. O brāhmaṇa, what is the use of the lore which does not protect those who are afflicted with diseases, and what is the use of that kṣatra power which does not protect those seeking refuge?” Hearing the words of Jālandhara, Śukra said to him: “O king, (now) see the power of me, a brāhmaṇa.” Saying so, he touched them with water (i.e. sprinkled water over them, and) roused them with the ‘hum’ sound. They were (thus) roused by Śukra. The Ocean’s son struck the gods with fatal arrows, and they fell in the battle all around. O king, with their bodies shattered by arrows, they sustained their life. They, pierced by arrows, did not die because of their immortality, O best one.

40-45a. Then god Viṣṇu said to Bṛhaspati: “O preceptor of gods, fie upon the power of you who are not bringing the gods back to life.” Bṛhaspati then immediately said to the lord of the world (i.e. Viṣṇu): “O lord, by means of the herbs I shall bring the gods back to life.” Speaking like this, Bṛhaspati too went to the mountain Droṇa, lying in the ocean; and comfortably taking the herbs (from the mountain), Bṛhaspati, by using them, brought the gods back to life. Then the gods who rose, killed the army of the demons. Seeing the gods to have risen, the Ocean’s son (Jālandhara) said to Śukra: “O Śukra, how did they get up without your lore?” Hearing these words spoken by the demon, Śukra said to the Ocean’s son:

45b-48a. “There is a great mountain named Droṇa, that lies in the ocean. There are herbs there, which bring the dead back to life. The preceptor of gods (Bṛhaspati), having gone there, and having taken the herbs (from there), rouses, with an incantation, the gods killed in the battle.” Hearing what Śukra said, Jālandhara, having entrusted the responsibility of his army to Śumbha, went to the Ocean.

48b-54. Having gone into the Ocean of Milk, he entered a divine, very bright house and saw there the pleasure-chamber of the Ocean of Milk. In it neither hot nor cold breezes (blew). Darkness was not noticed there. There excellent females, rich with the burden of breasts, having slim bellies and good teeth, sang, danced and sported. The sportive females served there by casting amorous glances, moving to and fro, with fascinating bodies, by means of lovely movements of their creeper-like arms, and the sounds of their steps, with sweet words and eulogies, by giving the pleasure of fragrance, with the hummings of the bees in the form of their eyes, by sportively moving the chowries, with garlands, and smiling glances. Having gone there the Ocean’s son who was eager to fight and seeing the Ocean of Milk sporting there, saluted the Ocean of Milk, and said to him: “O uncle, you are killing me. With the water inundate (Bṛhaspati) under the pretext of the herbs from the Droṇa mountain.”

## *The Ocean of Milk said*:

55-61. O son, how shall I inundate with my waves him who has sought my refuge? The best sages do not praise him who abandons him who has sought his refuge.

Hearing the words of his paternal uncle, the king of the demons continuously, angrily, struk the (Droṇa) mountain with the soles of his feet. Then, O king, mountain Droṇa who was very much afraid of Jālandhara, came, in his (original) form to Jālandhara, and said to him: “I have become your servant. Protect me who have sought your refuge. O you of great arms, by your order I shall (even) go to lower region. I shall stay (there) till you rule the kingdom.” Accompanied by the cry of the herbs and the weeping of the siddhas, the (Droṇa) mountain went to the lower region, (even) when the Ocean’s son was observing. Then the hero Jālandhara came to the great battlefield. Having got into the chariot already made ready, he went to Viṣṇu. The son of the River (i.e. Jālandhara) seeing Viṣṇu seated in the chariot, laughed loudly. (He said to him:)

62-69. “Wait in your chariot till I kill (other) enemies.” Speaking like this, he quickly struck the army of gods. The gods rent by (his) arrows, said to Bṛhaspati: “Protect (us).” Then Bṛhaspati quickly went to the Ocean of Milk. O king, not seeing (the mountain) Droṇa (there) he became very anxious. Then Bṛhaspati, having quickly come (back) to the battlefield, said to the gods: “O gods, all of you run away. The Droṇa mountain has perished.” Of Bṛhaspati who was speaking like this, the Ocean’s son, laughing at the gods, cut off the sacred thread and hair with sharp arrows. Then Bṛhaspati afflicted through fear to his life speedily ran away. O king, all gods (also) leaving the battlefield, fled. Having thus made the gods flee, he ran to Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu also, eager to fight, ran to the lord of demons. Then a fierce battle took place between Viṣṇu and Jālandhara. Dreadful by means of his volleys of arrows he overcame Viṣṇu.

70-74. Cutting to pieces those arrows and filling (i.e. covering) him with arrows, mighty Viṣṇu, harassed the demon Jālandhara with arrows. Jālandhara, with his body injured by the arrows, abandoned his chariot, and quickly ran to Viṣṇu standing in the battle to vanquish him. Seeing him coming, Viṣṇu pierced him with arrows. He bore the arrows of Viṣṇu on his body and came near his chariot. Whirling repeatedly Garuḍa with one hand and Viṣṇu’s chariot with the other (hand), he dropped them on the Śveta-dvīpa. Garuḍa, thrown from Jālandhara’s hand, also fell down. For a long time he took rest in Krauñca-dvīpa only. Viṣṇu, freeing himself from the whirling chariot, came to the battlefield, and said to the lord of demons: “Wait, wait.”

75-78. The Ocean’s son who liked fighting, seeing Viṣṇu who had again come to the battlefield, covered the ground with arrows and roared. Viṣṇu quickly pierced the demon on his chest with a (missile called) śakti that was throbbing. He (then) fell down. His son (then) took him from the battlefield to his residence, and said to him: “Oh, who has made me void of shame?” Then a great fight between (Viṣṇu) the enemy of the demons and Jālandhara, standing on the ground, took place there. Viṣṇu did not kill the demon out of his love for Lakṣmī; (but) himself fell down (struck) by his arrows.

79-83. Then seeing Viṣṇu fallen on the ground, the Ocean’s son, took him and got into his own chariot. Then Lakṣmī, dear to Viṣṇu, came weeping to him. Lakṣmī stood there. Seeing her husband, havingeyeslike lotuses, fallen, Lakṣmī said to the Ocean’s son: “O brother, listen to (my) words. You have vanquished and held Viṣṇu. O you of great power, it is not proper for you to bestow widowhood on your sister.” Hearing her words, he released the lord of the world (i.e. Viṣṇu). (Then) Jālandhara, of mighty arms, devoutly saluted his sister (i.e. Lakṣmī). Then he quickly saluted Viṣṇu’s feet through his love for his sister. Viṣṇu said to Jālandhara: “I am pleased with your act. O lord of demons, ask for a boon. Which boon shall I grant to you?”

## *Jālandhara said*:

84-86. O Viṣṇu, if you are pleased with this (act of) valour of me, then you should stay with Lakṣmī, at my father’s abode.

Saying, ‘All right’, the lord of the earth, remembered (i.e. thought of) Garuḍa (and on his arrival) mounted upon him and (went) to the Ocean of Milk with his wife (Lakṣmī). Since then Kṛṣṇa (i.e. Viṣṇu) lives in his father-in-law’s house. The lord of the gods desiring to do what is dear to Lakṣmī, lives in the ocean.


