+++
title = "009 The Creation of a New Powerful Weapon by Śiva"

+++
 

## *Yudhiṣṭhira said*:

I. O best brāhmaṇa, what did Indra and other gods, vanquished by Jālandnara, do then, when the kingdom of the heaven was snatched (by him)?

## *Nārada said*:

2-7. The gods, having abandoned heaven, met with a bad condition. They (had) neither ambrosia, nor (the portions in the offerings made at) sacrifices. They went to the place of the Self-born (Brahmā). In Brahmā’s house they saw Brahmā, Para-meṣṭhin, who had engaged his mind through suspension of his breath in the Supreme Soul. All the careful gods praised him with true words. Then the lord who was pleased, said: “What should I do?” Then the gods again told Brahmā, all (the acts) of Jālandhara, and (about) their own defeat. Thinking for a moment, Brahmā along with the gods went to Kailāsa. They, full of surprise, remained by the side of Kailāsa; and the gods, led by Brahmā and Indra praised (Śiva): “Salutation to you, Bhava, Śarva, Nīlagrīva. Salutation to you, Sthūla, Sūkṣma, Bahurūpa (having many forms).”

8-11a. Śiva, turning his face to all sides, and having heard (these) words, said to Nandin: “Quickly bring the gods (here).” Hearing the words of Śiva, Nandin quickly called the gods. The gods having entered the inner apartment, with their eyes full of wonder, saw there, seated on a seat, Śiva who conferred happiness on the world, who was waited upon by crores of devout attendants who were greyish due to dust.

11b-15a. Having first, along with the gods, saluted him, the grandsire (i.e. Brahmā) said: “Since this Indra had a malady he has foolishly come here. O great god, to whom those who seek his refuge, are dear, favour (us).” Then having heard the loud laughter of the Trident-holder (i.e. Śiva), Brahmā said to the lord of gods: “See the condition of the residents of heaven.” Then the lord of all, the highest god (Śiva) having known the desire of Brahmā’s (i.e. in Brahmā’s) mind, and having known Indra’s insult for the sake of gods, and being affectionately requested by Pārvatī, spoke (these) words, O king:

l5b-18. “How can I kill that enemy who is not killed by Viṣṇu? O grandsire, the weapons like the thunderbolt have been fashioned in olden times. That demon Jālandhara would not at all be killed with those weapons. Even I cannot kill him with weapons fashioned in olden times. Let gods fashion a weapon bearing my energy and strong.” Having heard this reply of Śiva, Brahmā said to him: “You (please) fashion the great weapon. You know your own power.”

19-23. Hearing these words of him, Śiva spoke to him: “O Brahman, with gods you discharge your lustre united with wrath.” Then Brahmā, the teacher of the Brahmāstra (Brahmā’s missile), discharged (his) lustre. Then Rudra (i.e. Śiva) himself discharged the lustre produced in his three eyes. All gods also angrily discharged a mass of lustres. In the meantime, Viṣṇu who was remembered by Śiva, came (there). Śiva, who was addressed by him, ‘What should I do?’ spoke to Viṣṇu: “O Viṣṇu, why was Jālandhara not killed by you in the war? How is it that leaving the gods you have gone to the Ocean of Milk, for lying there?”

## *Śrī Viṣṇu said*:

24-25. O lord of gods, if I kill him, how (can I say) Lakṣmī is dear to me? Therefore, O you, husband of Pārvatī, you (should) kill Jālandhara in a battle.

Viṣṇu who was told by Śiva, ‘Discharge your lustre due to anger’, discharged the lustre of Viṣṇu (i.e. his own lustre) and all that increased. Seeing the lustre to have increased and to have become extensive, (Śiva) spoke to Viṣṇu:

## *Śiva said*:

26-29. Please fashion my missile with this lustre.

Hearing those words of Śiva, Viśvakarman and others, looking at one another, thought: ‘What should we do?’ Seeing them to be silent, and knowing what was in their mind, Brahmā said: “The deities cannot bear your lustre which they are unable to look at. Who can curb your lustre?” Then jumping over the lustre, lord Śiva danced by roving in all directions with the hinder part of his left foot.

30-38. Then gods like Indra and others, seeing Śiva dancing over the lustre, joyfully sounded musical instruments. Since then, in dances roving in all directions is practised. Then due to the crushing caused by Śiva’s dance, a disc was produced, which had three lakhs of spokes, and which was full of a crore of bones. Due to being crushed by the foot of Śiva, particles went out from the lustre. And with that Viśvakarman fashioned a missile and aeroplanes. O king, the ageless gods, seeing that Sudarśana disc, said, through fear, to the lord of gods: “Protect us, protect us.” The earth received hardness due to the bright metals. The sheath that was fashioned by Viśvakarman was reduced to ash. With that weapon which was fashioned, Kāla, being burnt, fell on the ground. Then Śiva gave that disc into Brahma’s hand. The lord of Umā, Śiva, seeing that the beard (of Brahmā) was burnt by the masses of lustre from the disc, laughed, and quickly taking it (back) from Brahma’s hand, kept it under his arm-pit, as a poor man keeps a treasure. Then, the disc, remaining under the arm-pit of Śiva was not seen, as the fruit of the gift which is given by a great fool.


