+++
title = "016 Jālandhara Gives up His Disguise"

+++
 

## *Yudhiṣṭhira said*:

1\. Tell me in detail, O sage, how Jālandhara took up the form of Śiva, and what he did on seeing Pārvatī.

## *Nārada said*:

2-8. O king, when that deceptive Śiva (i.e. Jālandhara disguised as Śiva) longed for Pārvath she got disturbed, and did not speak anything. ‘It is not proper on the part of the lord (to ask for sea) who was obtained by me by penance and is not unwell.’ Deciding like this, Pārvatī did not speak to him, O king. Seeing no prevention, she, even as he was seeing, got up, went out and saw Gaṅgā flowing in the sky. Thinking her to be fit for residence, Pārvatī went to practise penance. Then, thinking, ‘Even formerly I secured the lord through penance. Now also (I shall secure him) like that’, she went with her friends from there. O king, in front of her Pārvatī saw Mandākinī falling from the mountain into the northern part of Mānasa. She was flowing like a series of necklaces separated from the garland of the sky. When the flood of the water of Mandākinī was drawn from the heaven, she dropped like the stream of the flood of the sacred texts from Brahmā’s mouth.

9-13a. On seeing that Gaṅgā she was delighted. Having, with her friend, bathed (in the water of Gaṅgā) and honoured her, she then placed her body (i.e. was seated) on the bank of the golden river. Being mutually afraid, they looked at one another. Pārvatī said to her friend Jayā: “O friend, taking up my form (i.e. disguised like me), quickly go to him. Know the truth: Whether he is Śiva or someone else. If he embraces you and kisses you, then know him to be the demon who has come after resorting to deception. If he talks to you about my well-being or otherwise, then undoubtedly he would be Śiva. (Then) come here and tell me”.

13b-17. Thus ordered by the goddess Jayā went near (i.e. to) Śiva. Seeing her coming, he was very much affiicted by lust, took her to be Pārvatī and embraced her. Then Jālandhara quickly ejected his semen; and O descendant of Kuru, his organ speedily became small. She said to him: “O demon, you shall never be Rudra. You are of a little semen (i.e. you ejected quickly). You are of a wicked behaviour. I am not Pārvatī. I am her friend.” Saying so and resorting to (i.e. taking up) her own form, she again spoke to him: “Due to this sin of yours, you are (i.e. will be) killed by Śiva.” Knowing thus (i.e. his falsehood), she reached (the place where Pārvatī remained).

18-23. Going there she said to Pārvatī: “O goddess, this one is Jālandhara, and not your husband Śiva.” Then Śiva’s wife (Pārvatī) was afflicted with fear, and she quickly entered a lotus. In the lotuses her friends became female bees due to the fear of Jālandhara, O king. Meantime, her guards, not seeing her, the queen, who had gone to the forest, were afraid, and quickly came to the battletield. Then they were asked by Śumbha. They, with nervousness, saluted him and for getting themselves exempted, they approached Viṣṇu, the lord of gods (*obscure*). Hearing that Vṛndā was kidnapped, he (i.e. Jālandhara) being afraid of Rudra, left the battle. Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, the two very speedy demons, who were sent by Sumbha, came to Mānasottara; and from behind a bush said to the demon who had taken up the form of (i.e. who was disguised as) Śiva:

24-28. “O best king, what is the use of that glory that has gone to a foreign country, which the enemies do not see (i.e. care for) and which is not enjoyed with the kinsmen. O lord, Śumbha has been vanquished; your army has been killed by Śiva in the battle. Come on, come on; fight; you will not obtain Pārvatī. How can a jackal secure a lioness? O king, how can darkness have the lustre of the sun? From the Jālandhara-pīṭha (i.e. your seat) Viṣṇu has taken away your queen. Such a news is heard. Therefore, tight. Having quickly vanquished Śiva in the battle, be the lord of all. Or (i.e. otherwise), being cut to pieces by the arrows of Śiva you will reach his place.”

29-33. Hearing these words of Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, Jālandhara, with his eyes red, angrily moved out from that mountain. Having cheered up Caṇḍa, and Muṇḍa, Jālandhara gave up the form (i.e. guise) of Śiva, and (while) going along the path, said to Durvāraṇa. “See, O Durvāraṇa, what now Viṣṇu has done there. Having resorted to deception, he has taken queen Vṛndā to his place. An intelligent person should never trust his son-inlaw who lives in his house. A wise man should dismiss him after having given him (in marriage) his daughter. A man should never keep his son-in-law in his house. (For) he (i.e. the son-in-law) gradually takes (away) his wealth, wife etc.”

## *Durvāraṇa said*:

34\. The (fruit of an) act is had in the same way as it is done, O king. You had come to kidnap Pārvatī (and) Viṣṇu took away your young wife.

Hearing his plain words, Jālandhara silently thought for a moment.

## *Jālandhara said*:

35\. Should I go to vanquish Śiva or the powerful Viṣṇu? When the two duties have come up, tell me which is more important.

## *Durvāraṇa said*:

36-39. If you go to conquer Viṣṇu, Śiva will strike you from behind. The brave will strike (you). Śiva will not allow you to go. Therefore, having (first) conquered (Śiva), the lord of beings, and (then) having brought him under control, march against Viṣṇu, if you know his place. O hero, now quickly go to the very powerful demons. Wage a fierce battle which will mature well (i.e. give you good fruit) in heaven.

Having heard (these) words of Durvāraṇa Jālandhara went to fight with Śiva, the meditating sage.


