+++
title = "021 The Greatness of Haridvāra"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1\. O you master of knowledge, tell (me) how those very mighty, brave, valorous sons of Sagara, sixy thousand in number, were born.

## *The lord of Pārvatī said*:

2-8. Sagara had two wives whose sins were burnt by penance. Aurva, the best sage,being pleased, granted them boons: One (queen) chose sixty thousand powerful sons. The (other) one, having the boon, asked for one son supporting the family. Then in a gourd one gave birth to many brave sons. They were brought up in due course by the nurses. The boys enhanced love when the pitchers were filled with ghee. For the magnanimous ones the cows were milked. The noble ones grew due to that milk only. One son by name Pañcajana became the king. Then there was the powerful (son) of Pañcajana named Aṃśumat. Dilīpa was his son, and his son was Bhagīratha. He, of a good vow, brought (to the earth) the greatest river, Gaṅgā. Having brought her to the ocean, he made her his daughter.

## *Nārada said*:

9\. How did he bring Gaṅgā? What (kind of) penance did he practise? Tell me all that. O you treasure of kindness, you are of a good vow.

## *Mahādeva said*:

10-16. For the well-being of his ancestors he went to the Himālaya mountain. Having gone there he practised penance for a myriad years. That first god who is untinged, was pleased (with him). This Gaṅgā given by him came (here) from the sky. There god Viśveśvara always remains. Seeing Gaṅgā coming, he seized that Jāhnavī (i.e. Gaṅgā). He held her in the mass of his matted hair for a myriad years. Due to the prowess of the lord Gaṅgā did not move out of it. Then he (i.e. the king) thought: ‘Where has my mother gone?’ Having thought like this through meditation (he knew): ‘The lord has seized her.’ Then that king Bhagīratha went to Kailāsa. O best sage, having gone there, he practised a severe penance. Then he propitiated (me). I gave him the river. Having given up (i.e. plucked) one hair, the river was given (to him).

17-23a. Taking Gaṅgā, he went to the nether world where his ancestors stood (dead). Then the first name of Gaṅgā was said to be Alakanandā. When she went (i.e. flowed) to Haridvāra, she came to be called Viṣṇupādodakī. That is an excellent holy place which is not easily accessible even to gods. Those men who bathe at that holy place, and especially after seeing (the image of) Viṣṇu go round (the image) keeping (it) to their right, do not experience grief. There are many heaps of sins like (those of) killing a brāhmaṇa etc. All those perish on always seeing (the image of) Viṣṇu. Once I had gone to Haridvāra, the place of Viṣṇu. Due to the prowess of that holy place, I became of the form of Viṣṇu. Those best men who go (to this holy place), go to Viṣṇu. Those human beings—men and women, have four arms everywhere. Merely by seeing (the image of) Viṣṇu they all go to Vaikuṇṭha.

23b-28. For me also that holy place Haridvāra is a superior holy place. It is the principal holy place among the holy places. It gives the four goals (of human life). In the Kali-age it gives religious merit to men, and gives salvation and material welfare also. There the clear (water of) Gaṅgā always flows. This auspicious, excellent, account of Haridvāra is told (by me). Eternal fruit is (obtained) by those who listen to it. A learned man, merely by seeing (the image of) Viṣṇu obtains that fruit which is obtained when a horse-sacrifice is performed or when a thousand cows (are given). O brāhmaṇa, many sins of this kind—all of them-perish due to just seeing (the image of) Viṣṇu.


