+++
title = "025 A Three-night Tulasī Vow"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1\. Like this, I have, through your favour, heard the greatness of Tulasī. Now tell me the vow of Tulasī (lasting for) three days.

## *Sadāśiva said*:

2-9. O very intelligent brāhmaṇa, listen to this ancient vow, having heard which (a man) gets freed from all sins. There is no doubt about it. Formerly in the Raibhyantara kalpa there was a king (named) Prajāpati. His well-known and very chaste wife was Candrarūpā. She practised this vow giving the fruits of all desires. Her vow, giving (the fruit of) righteousness, worldly prosperity, sensual enjoyment lasted for three, nights. The life of those who have listened to the Tulasī-vow is fruitful. O Nārada, on the ninth of the bright fortnight of Kārtika, a man should observe restraint, be pious, control his senses and sleep on the (bare) ground. Intending to practise the Tulasī-vow, he, being pure and with his mind controlled, should, as a rule, sleep in the vicinity of a Tulasī-grove. Then at mid-day, he, having bathed in the pure water in a river etc., should duly gratify (with oblations) the manes and deities. He should get fashioned (a) golden (image of) Viṣṇu with Lakṣmī. He, desiring his welfare, should not be dishonest as regards wealth. Then he should get fashioned a pair of garments. The garments should be yellow or white. He should duly commence the propitiatory rite for the nine planets.

10-14. Having put an oblation of rice, barley and pulse boiled for presentation to the gods and the manes, he (then) should offer a sacrifice to Viṣṇu. Having on the twelfth day carefully worshipped the lord of gods, he should duly place a pure pitcher without any bruise with five jewels and with leaves and herbs. On it, in a vessel, he should place (the image of) Viṣṇu with Lakṣmī. He should put it at the root of Tulasī to the accompaniment of Vedic and Purāṇic hymns. He should sprinkle the grove of Tulasī with water only. He should bathe the god of gods, the best one in the world, with the five[^1] sweet things (viz. milk, sugar, ghee, curd and honey) (and to the accompaniment of this hymn of solicitation): ‘May that lord of gods, the divine one, who is of endless forms, who is of the form of the entire universe, who in the water sustains the creation of the world, who through his Māyā creates the world, be pleased with me’.

[^1]:  Pañcāmṛta: A collection of five sweet things used in worshipping deities. They are: milk, sugar, ghee, curd, and honey.

15\. This is the hymn of solicitation. ‘Come on, O Acyuta, O lord of gods, O mass of lustre, O lord of the world. You always remove the darkness. Protect me from the ocean of the mundane existence.’

16\. This is the invocatory hymn. Good bath is (given to him) with the five sweet things and with sandal mixed with water, so also with the water of Gaṅgā and other (rivers). ‘May Ananta (i.e. Viṣṇu thus) bathed, be pleased.’

17\. This is the hymn (to be recited) at the time of bathing the image of the deity. ‘O god, I have devoutly offered you the smearing with sandal, agaru, camphor and saffron etc. With Lakṣmī, accept it.’

18\. This is the hymn (to be recited) at the time of smearing (the image). ‘O Nārāyaṇa, salutation to you, the protector (of me) from the ocean of hell. O you lord of the three worlds, I offer you two auspicious garments.’

19\. This is the hymn (to be recited) at the time of (offering) the garments. ‘O Dāmodara, my salutation to you. Protect me from the ocean of the worldly existence. I have offered you the sacred thread. O Puruṣottama, (please) accept it.’

20\. This is the hymn (to be recited) at the time of (offering) the sacred thread. This is the hymn (to be recited) at the time of offering flowers.

21\. ‘O lord, I have offered you fragrant flowers like those of mālatī etc. O lord of gods, accept them with love.’

22\. This is the hymn (to be recited) at the time of offering of eatables. ‘O lord of gods, accept the betal nuts, the nāga-leaves along with camphor. (Please) accept the tāmbūla.’

23\. This is the hymn (to be recited) at the time of offering a tāmbūla. Having devoutly offered incense, agaru mixed with guggula (a particular fragrant gum resin) he should offer the worship thus. He should use a lamp with (i.e. burning due to) ghee.

24-27. O best among sages, he, being controlled, should prepare various kinds of lamps in front of Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa in the vicinity of the Tulasī-grove, and should offer materials of worship to the god holding the disc. On the ninth he should offer the best materials of worship with a coconut for (obtaining) a son; on the tenth he should offer a citron fruit for the accomplishment of religious merit and sensual enjoyment. On the eleventh he should worship the twin deity with a pomegranate. (This would) always destroy his poverty.

28-29. Covering with a piece of cloth, a full plate of metal and a basket full of seven (kinds of) grains and betel nuts, he should offer it to the god to the accompaniment of this (i.e. the following) hymn. O Nārada, listen with a concentrated mind. ‘O god, you, with Tulasī, (please) accept this material of worship always accompanied by a conch, offered by me. O lord of gods, my salutation to you.’

30-35. This is the hymn (to be offered) at the time of offering materials of worship. Having thus worshipped Viṣṇu, the lord of gods, along with Lakṣmī, he should solicit the lord of gods for the fulfilment (of the vow). (He should say): ‘O god, I, being free from sensual desires and anger, have fasted by means of this vow. O lord of gods, you alone are my refuge. O god Janārdana, let all that which in (i.e. while practising) this vow I have done (i.e. left) incomplete, be complete through your favour. Salutation to you, O lotus-eyed one; salutation to you who lie in water. O Keśava, through your favour I have practised the vow. O Keśava, O you who destroy the darkness of ignorance, being favourably disposed to me due to this vow, be one who would give me the sight of knowledge.’ Then at night (he should) keep awake, should sing songs, read (religious) books along with those who know sounds and art of dancing and with very auspicious and meritorious accounts.

36-43. When it is daybreak, and when the bright sun has arisen, he should devoutly invite brāhmaṇas and offer a śrāddha in the manner of Viṣṇu’s devotee. Having fed them, as they like, with sweetened milk and ghee, and having given them tāmbūlas, flowers, sandal etc. along with presents, so also sacred threads, garments, garlands and sandal, he should feed three (brāhmaṇa-)couples (and give them) garments, ornaments and saffron. He should also fill baskets according to his capacity with coconuts, cooked foods, garments and various kinds of fruits. He should make his preceptor and his wife put on the garments and divine ornaments (offered to them). He should worship (them) with sandal and flowers. He should also give a milch-cow along with articles of household use and with presents and garments. Listen to me who am telling you. All that religious merit which men obtain after bathing in all holy places is obtained by them through the favour of the lord of gods. Having enjoyed many pleasures and charming desired objects, he, through Viṣṇu’s favour, obtains Viṣṇu’s position in the end.



