+++
title = "033 A Hymn to Śani as a Remover of Trouble"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1\. O best god, tell me how the oppression caused by Saturn goes away (i.e. is removed). A living being is freed by that which is heard from your mouth.

## *Māhādeva said*:

2-11. O divine sage, litsen to the account. By that you will be free from bondage. This Saturn is the lord of Planets and the great lord of all. This divinity is well-known. He is a great Planet of the form of death. He is having matted hair; is having hair like diamond pins; he is fearful to the demons. O lord, in this world his account is not well-known. I have especially guarded it and have not told it to anyone. Formerly in Raghu’s family there was a very famous king, Daśaratha by name. He was a sovereign emperor and a great hero. Knowing Saturn to be near Kṛttikā the astrologers informed him: Now Saturn will go piercing Rohiṇī (i.e. will pass through Rohiṇī; the piercing of the cart (-like shape of the constellation Rohiṇī) is very fierce and fearful to the gods and demons; for twelve years there will be a very great (i.e. severe) famine. Having heard these words, the king held consultation with his ministers: “What is the fearful (calamity) that has come?” Seeing the world, the citizens and the peasants distressed, people everywhere said: “The end of the world has come. Regions with cities, villages have been frightened all around.” The devout king asked brāhmaṇas led by Vasiṣṭha: “O best brāhmaṇas, tell me what measure (should) be (adopted) now?”

## *Vasiṣṭha said*:

12-18. This is the star of Prajāpati. When it is pierced, where (i.e. how) will the subjects remain? This conjunction cannot be averted (even) by Brahmā and Śakra etc.

Thinking in his mind about a rash act, he took up his divine bow along with divine weapons, quickly got into his chariot and went to the group of stars (i.e. to the sky), numbering a lakh, and remaining over the Sun, and (covering a region) of a yojana and a quarter, and dwelling on the back of Rohiṇī. Formerly king Daśaratha, shining with great jewels and bright with a diadem and a crown looked bright in his golden, divine chariot which was decorated with gems and jewels, to which horses having the colour of swans were yoked, and which had a banner (fluttering) high. At that time he shone in the sky like another sun. Having fully (drawn) his bow up to the ear he fixed a missile that would destroy (everything). Saturn, having seen that destructive missile causing fear to gods and demons, laughed through its fear and said these words:

## *Saturn said*:

19-20. O lord of kings, your valour is great and causes fear to the enemies. O king, gods, demons, human beings, siddhas, vidyādharas, serpents, when looked at by me, are reduced to ash. O lord of kings, I am pleased with your penance and valour. Ask for a boon—whatever you desire in your mind. I shall grant it.

## *Daśaratha said*:

21-24. You should never pierce Rohiṇī and go (i.e. you should never pass through Rohiṇī), as long as the rivers, the oceans, the Moons, the Sun and the earth remain. I have, O Sauri, solicited (what I want). I do not desire any other boon from you.

Granting him an eternal boon, Śani said: “Let it be so”. Again being pleased, he said: “O you of a good vow, ask for a boon.” With a pleased mind he (the king) then solicited another boon from Saturn. (He said): “O Sun’s son, you should never pierce (i.e. pass through) the cart (i.e. Rohiṇī). Never cause a famine (lasting) for twelve years’.

## *Saturn said*:

25-27. There shall never be a famine (lasting) for twelve years. This fame of yours will spread in the three worlds.

The king, having obtained a couple of boons, and thrilling (with joy) kept his bow on the chariot, and with palms of his hands joined he meditated upon goddess Sarasvatī and Vināyaka, the chief of (Śiva’s) attendants. (Then) king Daśaratha recited this hymn of praise of Saturn:

## *Daśaratha said*:

28-38. My homage to Kṛṣṇa, Nīla (i.e. the dark one), to Śitikaṇṭhanibha (i.e. one who resembles Śiva), to Kālāgnirūpa (i.e. of the form of the destructive fire), to Kṛtānta (i.e. Death). My obeisance to Nirmāṃsadeha (i.e. having no i.e. very little flesh in his body), to Dīrghaśmasrujāta (i.e. having long moustache and beard), to Viśālanetra (i.e. having big eyes), to you having thin belly and fearful figure. My homage to Puṣkalagātra (i.e. having a large body), to Sthūlaroman (i.e. having thick hair), to Dīrgha (i.e. long), to Śuṣka (i.e. dry); salutation to you having death-like fangs. Salutation to Koṭarākṣa (i.e. having hollow-like senses), Durnirīkṣya (i.e. difficult to be looked at); Salutation to Ghora (i.e. fearful), to Raudra (i.e. fierce), to Bhīṣaṇa (i.e. terrible), to Kapālin (i.e. wearing skulls); homage to Sarvabhakṣa (i.e. one consuming everything), to you, O Valimukha (i.e. to you who have wrinkles on your face); salutation to you, O Sun’s son, to you, O Bhāskari (i.e. the Sun’s son), to Bhayada (i.e. causing fear); homage to you, O Adhodṛṣṭi (i.e. (looking down), to you, O Saṃvartaka (i.e. fire of destruction), to Mandagati (i.e. moving slowly), salutation to Nistriṃśa (i.e. pitiless), to you whose body is burnt by penance, to you who are always engaged in abstract meditation; constant homage to Kṣudhārta (i.e. oppressed with hunger), to Atṛpta (i.e. not content); salutation to you, the eye of knowledge, to the son of Kaśyapa’s son. When you are pleased, you give a kingdom; when you are angry you take it away in a moment.

Thus praised, that very powerful king of Planets, viz. Saturn, the son of the Sun, was thrilled (with joy) and again said these words (to Daśaratha): “O you best king of a good vow, with this hymn of praise of (i.e. recited by) you, I am pleased. Ask for your desired boon. I shall grant it, O descendant of Raghu.”

## *Daśaratha said*:

39\. O Sauri (i.e. Sun’s son), from today you are not to cause any trouble to anyone—gods, demons, men, beasts, birds and serpents.

## *Śani said*:

40-51. Grahas (i.e. Planets) are (so called) since they seize (a being). They are said to cause trouble. I (shall) tell you about something proper which is solicited and cannot be given. A man who will recite once or twice this hymn of praise recited by you, will be free from trouble (just) at the moment. In the fourth existence in the end, I, having gone to death, would give death to gods, demons, human beings, siddhas, vidyādharas and goblins. On the other hand, I shall never trouble him who with faith, becomes pure and calm, worships my iron image with Śamī-leaves, and who would offer as present iron mixed with beans, rice, sesamum-seeds, and would give a black cow, a bull to a brāhmaṇa, and would, especially on my day (i.e. Saturday) worship (me) with this hymn, and would, with the palms of his hands joined, recite the hymn (in my honour) after having worshipped me. I shall always protect him and (keep away) the trouble from a Planet during the Planet’s influence, in the sign of Zodiac in which a person is born, in the Planet’s aspect or in the middle of it. By doing this only, the world would be free from trouble. Thus, O descendant of Raghu, I have skilfully granted you a boon.

Having obtained three boons, king Daśaratha regarded himself as successful and saluted Śani. Permitted by Śani, he speedily got into his chariot and went to his place. Then the king had obtained bliss. That man who having got up in the morning on a Saturday, would recite this hymn of praise, so also the man who devoutly listens to this hymn of praise when it is being recited, is freed from a sin, and is honoured in heaven.


