+++
title = "036 The Vow of Pakṣavardhinī"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1\. O Mahādeva, of what type is (the vow) called Pakṣavardhinī, having observed which a being is free from a great sin?

## *Śrī Mahādeva said*:

2\. That would be Pakṣavardhinī, equal to myriads of horse-sacrifices, when either the new-moon day or the full-moon day is complete (i.e. lasts for the entire day and night) with sixty ghaṭikās and prolongs on the day of pratipad (i.e. the first day of a fortnight).

## *Nārada said*:

3\. O Mahādeva, now I am asking about the manner of the worship, having done which a man would obtain great fruit.

## *Mahādeva said*:

4-12. O son of a brāhmaṇa, I shall now tell the manner of the worship. There is no doubt that a man gets the fruit when Viṣṇu is worshipped and adored, since by the performance of worship Viṣṇu is pleased. He should put a pitcher, which has no scratch, which is full of water, which is smeared with sandal, which contains five gems, which is wrapped with garlands of flowers. On the pitcher he should place a vessel containing wheat. (The image of) the deity should be made of gold and should be named after the month. He should nicely bathe (the image of) the god of gods, Jagannātha, the lord of the world, with pañcāmṛta according to the (proper) rite. It should be besmeared with saffron, agaru and sandal. He should offer a pair of garments along with an umbrella and sandals. He should worship the (image of the) lord of deities kept in the vessel on the pitcher. (Touching) the feet (he should say, ‘My homage) to Padmanābha’. (Touching) the knees (he should say, ‘My homage) to Viśvamūrti’. (Touching) the thighs (he should say, ‘My homage) to Jñānagamya (i.e. one who is reached through knowledge). (Touching) the waist (he should say, ‘My homage) to Jñānaprada (i.e. one who gives knowledge). (Touching) the belly (he should say, ‘My homage) to Viśvanātha’. (Touching) the heart (he should say, ‘My homage) to Śrīdhara. (Touching) the throat (he should say, ‘My homage) to Kaustubhakaṇṭha’. (Touching) the arms (he should say, ‘My homage) to Kṣatrāntakārin (i.e. one who destroyed the kṣatriyas)’. (Touching) the forehead (he should say, ‘My homage) to Vyomamūrdhan (i.e. one who has his head in the sky)’. (Touching) the head (he should say, ‘My homage) to Sarvarūpin (i.e. of a universal form)’. He should also utter his name (and worship) Lakṣmī full of all limbs and of a divine form.

13-19. The wise one should thus duly worship and then should offer materials of worship along with a white coconut to the Disc-holder, the god of gods. The vow becomes complete by means of this offering. (He should pray to the deity as:) ‘O lord of the world, lift me who am drowned in the ocean of the worldly existence. You are the lord of all the worlds. You are actually the lord of the world. Accept the respectful offering offered by me. Salutation to you, O Padmanābha’. Offerings of pleasant food, especially those having (all) the six flavours should be very devoutly offered to Viṣṇu. He should devoutly offer the nāga-leaf along with camphor to the god. He should fill the lamp with ghee or with sesamum-oil. Doing (these) properly he should (duly) worship the preceptor. He should cause to be offered (i.e. should offer him) garments, a turban and a dress. He should cause to be given (i.e. should give) the preceptor a present according to his capacity. Having given (him) food and tāmbūla he should cause to be given (i.e. should give) him a respectful offering.

20-32. The Dvādaśi (called) Pakṣavardhinī should be observed by the poor while keeping in view the estimate of their wealth and according to their capacity. It should be carefully and properly observed. Then he should keep awake by singing, dancing, the recitation of a Purāṇa and laughter and mirth. They praise and command the keeping awake (in honour) of the Disc-holder (i.e. Viṣṇu). For ten existences an every day festival would take place in their houses. Therefore, a man should observe this most virtuous Pakṣavardhinī. Having done (i.e. had) all religious merit, he undoubtedly obtains(its) fruits. Those wise men who have listened to the greatness of Pakṣavardhinī, have done meritorious deeds till the final destruction of the world. A man obtains that religious merit which he (would) obtain by practising the Pañcāgnisādhana or by visiting sacred places, by keeping awake (in honour) of Viṣṇu. The Pakṣavardhinī is virtuous, pure, and destroys sins. When a fast is observed on the day (of Pakṣavardhinī) it destroys (the sin due to) crores of brāhmaṇa-murders. It was, O sage, formerly observed by Vasiṣṭha, so also by Bhāradvāja; this one, dear to Viṣṇu, was observed by Dhruva and Ambarīṣa. It is virtuous like Kāśī. It is like Dvārakā. When a devotee fasts on this day, it gives him his desired object. It is blessed, most blessed. It destroys (the sin of) a myriad of murders. It should be especially observed by those who are devoted to knowledge. O god, lord of all should be served by all who are intent upon (observing) the vow. As the moon waxes, especially in the bright half, the Pakṣavardhinī waxes for the devotee (of Viṣṇu). As darkness goes away at sunrise, the sin of a man on observing (the vow of) Pakṣavardhinī perishes.


