+++
title = "049 Mohinī Ekādaśī"

+++
 

## *Yudhiṣṭhira said*:

1\. Of which name would be the Ekādaśī in the bright half of Vaiśākha? What is its fruit? What is the manner of (observing) it? Tell it, O Viṣṇu.

## *Śrīkrṣṇa said*:

2\. O lord of kings, the same as you are asking me (now) was formerly asked by the intelligent Rāma from Vasiṣṭha.

## *Rāma said*:

3-4. O glorious one, I desire to hear about the best among the vows, which destroys all sins, and which cuts off all miseries. I have experienced sorrows (like the ones) due to separation from Sītā. So I am scared. (Therefore), O great sage, I am asking you.

## *Vasiṣṭha said*:

5-10. O Rāma, you have asked well. This is (due to) your devoted mind. Merely by uttering your name a man is purified. Yet, with a desire for the well-being of the people, I shall tell you (about) the excellent vow, (most) pure of the purifying vows. O Rāma, the Ekādaśī (that) would fall in the bright half of Vaiśākha, is called Mohinī. It is great and removes all sins. Due to the prowess of the vow of this (Ekādaśī men) are freed from the noose of delusion and the multitude of sins. I am telling you the truth and the truth (only). Therefore, O Rāma, this one, that destroys sins and puts an end to great misery should be observed by (people) like you. O Rāma, listen attentively to the great, sin-removing story, merely by hearing which (even) a great sin perishes.

11-20. On the lovely bank of Sarasvatī there was an auspicious city Bhadrāvatī. A king named Dyutimat ruled there. He was born in the Lunar family. He was courageous and was true to his word. A vaiśya prosperous with wealth and grains lived there. He was known as Dhanapāla. He prompted auspicious deeds. He constructed public water places, wells, temples, gardens, tanks and houses. He was engrossed in devotion for Viṣṇu and was calm. He had five sons: Sumanas, Dyutimat, Medhāvin and Sukṛta. The fifth Dhṛṣṭabuddhi was alway engaged in (committing) great sins. He was attached to the union with others’ wives, and was well-versed in stories about voluptuous people. He was attached to addictions like gambling, and ardently longed for (the company of) others’ wives. He did not intend to worship deities, nor the dead ancestors, nor brāhmaṇas. The wicked one lived (by doing) injustice, and wasted the money of his father. He ate what was prohibited and was always attached to drinking liquor. The wicked one threw his arms round the neck of a prostitute and wandered over the crossway. He was expelled from the house by his father and was also forsaken by his kinsmen. He even exhausted the money, ornaments on his body. He was abandoned by the harlots and was condemned (by them) due to the loss of his wealth. Then he was disturbed in mind, was without clothes, and was oppressed by hunger. “What should I do? Where should I go? By what means shall I subsist?” (Thus he thought.)

21-29. Just in his father’s city he started stealing. He was arrested by the royal officers, but was released due to the importance of his father. Being zealous, they bound him, again released him and again bound him. The wicked Dḥṛṣṭabuddhi was bound with strong fetters. He was repeatedly whipped and tormented. “O dull-witted one, you should not live within the range (i.e. limits) of my kingdom.” Saying so, he was freed by the king from the strong fetters. Due to his fear he went out (of the city) to a dense forest. Being oppressed by hunger and thirst he ran here and there. Like a lion he killed deer, pigs and spotted (deer). Addicted to eating flesh, he always lived in the forest. Taking a bow in his hand, and putting the quiver on his back, he, going on foot, killed the birds moving in the forest. That blinded, cruel Dhṛṣṭabuddhi killed these—partridges, peacocks, francolins, and rats—and other (birds). He plunged into the mud of sins due to sins committed in his former existence. He was overcome with pain and sorrow. He was annoyed day and night. Due to his acquisition of some religious merit he reached the hermitage of Kauṇḍinya.

30-32. Dhṛṣṭabuddhi, oppressed with the burden of grief, approached the ascetic who had bathed in Gaṅgā in the month of Vaiśākha. Due to a slight contact of his garment his sins vanished and his misfortune was destroyed. Standing in front of Kauṇḍinya, he, with the palms of his hands joined, said to him:

## *Dhṛṣṭahuddhi said*:

O brāhmaṇa, O greatest of the brāhmaṇas, taking compassion on me, tell me that religious merit due to the powers of which salvation takes place.

## *Kauṇḍinya said*:

33-39. Listen attentively to that by which your sins will perish. In the dark half of Vaiśākha falls the well-known (Ekādaśī) named Mohinī. Prompted by my words, observe the vow of that Ekādaśī. When men observe a fast on this Mohinī (Ekādaśī), their sins comparable to Meru and earned (i.e. committed) in many existences perish.

Hearing these words of the sage, Dhṛṣtabuddhi, pleased in his mind, observed duly the vow according to the advice of Kauṇḍinya. O best among kings, when he observed (this) vow, his sins vanished. Then, he, having a divine body and mounted upon Garuḍa, went to Viṣṇu’s world which is free from all calamities. O Rāmacandra, the Mohinī-vow is excellent in this way. In three worlds with the mobile and the immobile, there is nothing greater than it. Sacrifices and the like, so also (visits to) holy places, gifts are not equal even to the sixteenth part of (the religious merit) it (gives). By reciting (about) it and listening to (its account) a man would obtain the fruit of (the gift of) a thousand cows.


