+++
title = "056 Ajā Ekādaśī"

+++
 

## *Yudhiṣṭhira said*:

1\. O Janārdana, I desire to hear what would be (i.e. is) the name of the Ekādaśī falling in the dark half of Bhādrapada. (Please) tell it.

## *Śrīkṛṣṇa said*:

2-11. O king, listen attentively. I shall tell (you) in detail. This Ekādaśī is called Ajā and it destroys all sins. The sins of him who on this day observes this vow after worshipping Viṣṇu, perish; (so also they perish) even by listening to the vow. O king, there is nothing greater than this, beneficial for both the worlds. I have told you the truth. My words are not false. Formerly there was a king known as Hariścandra. He was an emperor, true to his word, and the lord of the whole earth. Due to the acquisition of (the fruit of) some act he was deprived of his kingdom. He sold his wife and son and also himself. The righteous king became the slave of a cāṇḍāla. O lord of kings resorting to truth he removed the garments of the dead; (but) that best king never swerved from truth. In this way the king passed many years. Then the king, full of anxiety, became very much distressed. “What should I do? Where should I go? How shall I escape (this)?” When he who was plunged into the ocean of sin, was thinking like this, a certain sage knowing that the king was distressed came (there). Brahma has created brāhmaṇas to oblige others. The best king, seeing the excellent sage, bowed (to him).

12-23. Joining the palms of his hands, he stood before Gautama. He told (him) his account accompanied by (i.e. full of) grief. Hearing the king’s words, Gautama was amazed. The sage instructed the king in this vow. The sage instructed the king (in the observance of) the vow. “O king, the very auspicious Ekādaśī falling in the dark half of Bhādrapada called Ajā and giving great merit has come. O king, observe its vow. Your sin will come to an end. Due to your good fortune it will fall on the seventh day (from today). Engaging yourself in a fast; keep awake at night. When thus this vow is observed, your sin will certainly perish. O best king, due to the efficacy of your religious merit, I have come (here).” Telling like this, the sage disappeared. Hearing the sage’s words, the king observed the excellent vow. When the vow was observed, the king’s sin perished in a moment. O best king, listen to the efficacy of this vow. There would be the end of the misery which (otherwise) would be had for many years. Due to the efficacy of the vow the king overcame his misery. He was united with his wife and lived with his son. Drums sounded in the sky and shower of flowers fell from the sky. By the efficacy of the Ekādaśī he got the kingdom free from (any) nuisance. Along with (the residents of) his city and his paraphernalia, Hariścandra obtained heaven. O king, those men who observe the vow of this kind, get free from all sins and go to heaven. By reciting (about this) vow or even by listening to (a man) would obtain the fruit of a horse-sacrifice.


