+++
title = "063 Kāmadā Ekādaśī"

+++
 

## *Yudhiṣṭhira said*:

1-9. O lord of the world, I have heard about vows having many virtues. But, O Janārdana, I have heard nothing like the Ekādaśī(-vow). Again tell about the Ekādaśī(-vow) which destroys sins and gives religious merit and observing which a man would obtain the highest position in the world.

## *Śrīkṛṣṇa said*:

O lord of the world, whether the Ekādaśī would be in the bright or the dark fortnight, it is not to be omitted, as it (gives) salvation and enhances happiness. O king, in the Kali-age, Ekādaśī frees a man from the bonds of the mundane existence, gives all desired objects, and destroys all sins on the earth. O best king, the Ekādaśī (falling) on a Sunday or a Tuesday or on the day of the passage of the Sun or a Planet through a Zodiacal sign should always be fasted on. It increases (the number of) sons and grandsons. Those to whom Viṣṇu is dear, should never give up the Ekadāśī-vow. It always gives a (long) life, fame, progeny and health. The Ekādaśī-vow always gives salvation, (handsome) form, kingdom. O king, those men who, endowed with great faith, observe it in the manner as is laid down, are of the form of Viṣṇu. O king, undoubtedly they are seen to be liberated while living.

## *Yudhiṣṭhira said*:

O Kṛṣṇa, how is it that those who are seen to be of the form of sin (i.e. who are sinners), are liberated while living, and are of the nature of Viṣṇu? I have a great curiosity.

## *Śrīkrṣṇa said*:

10-22. O king, how are they who in the Kali-age observe devoutly and according to the acts as are laid down in the sacred texts, the excellent Ekādaśī-vow without (drinking) water, not of the form of Viṣṇu or not liberated while living? There is no other auspicious vow like that of Ekādaśī which removes all sins and gives all desired objects to men. Having eaten once only on the Daśamī day, and observed the vow without drinking water on the Nandā (Ekādaśī day) and having broken the fast on the Bhadrā (day), men become similar to Viṣṇu. A faithful man who observes the auspicious vow of the Kāmadā (Ekādaśī) obtains his desired (objects) in this and in the next world. This (vow) is pure, purifying, and destroys great sins. O best king, this one gives pleasures and salvation to those who observe it. A man should duly worship Viṣṇu on Kāmadā with flowers, incense etc., so also with offerings of food. A devotee of Viṣṇu, who observes the vow, should avoid these ten (articles) on Daśamī: bell-metal, flesh, beans, grams, kodrava, vegetables, honey, food offered by others, eating food and sexual union. On the Ekādaśī day he should avoid gambling, sport, sleep, tāmbūla, brushing his teeth, censuring others, wickedness, harming (others) and sex, (so also he should avoid) anger, false words on the Ekādaśī day. On the Dvādaśī day he should avoid bell-metal, flesh, beans, oil, false speech, exertion, journey, food and sexual union, (mounting upon) a bull’s back, others’ food, and vegetables. O king, those who have observed the Kāmadā (Ekādaśī) in this manner, and having after keeping awake at night, worshipped Viṣṇu, are freed from all sins and go to the best position. O king, by reciting (about) or listening to this vow (a man) would obtain the fruit of (having given) a thousand cows.


