+++
title = "068 The Greatness of Viṣṇu’s Devotees"

+++
 

## *Maheśvara said*:

1-9. O Nārada, listen, I shall tell (you) the characteristic(s) of the devotees of Viṣṇu, hearing which people are freed from such sins as the murder of a brāhmaṇa. O best sage, listen. Now I shall tell you of what kind their characteristics are and what their nature is. O best sage, listen. I shall describe to you a man of that kind. Since he belongs to Viṣṇu, he is called Vaiṣṇava. Of all the castes Vaiṣṇava is said to be the greatest. A Vaiṣṇava is (born) in the family of those whose food is excellent (i.e. who eat excellent food). O brāhmaṇa, by merely seeing them, in whom forgiveness, kindness, austerities and truth reside, sin perish es like cotton. He whose mind, free from doing harm, has settled upon Viṣṇu, (so also) he who would always put on (the marks of) a conch, a disc, a mace, a lotus, so also he who would put round his neck the rosary of Tulaśī[Tulasī?]-wood, and would always put on the marks of twelve kinds, so also he who knows (the difference between) righteousness and unrighteousness is called a Vaiṣṇava. He is always engaged in (reciting) the Vedas and sacred texts and always performs sacrifices. So also the family of them is blessed, and glory is said to belong to them who repeatedly celebrate the twentyfour festivals.

10-20. In the world those devotees of Viṣṇu in whose family only (i.e. at least) one devotee of Viṣṇu is born, are most blessed. He has repeatedly emancipated that family, O brāhmaṇa. All the stocks like the oviparous, sprouting, viviparous beings should be known as having conches, discs and maces. By merely seeing him the killer of a brāhmaṇa is always purified. But, O divine sage, I shall tell you that more blessed than those are the Vaiṣṇavas seen on the earth, O great sage. Those knowing the truth should look upon them as equal to Viṣṇu. I have heard that they are undoubtedly most blessed in the world in the Kali age. He who has worshipped Viṣṇu, has worshipped all. He who has honoured Viṣṇu’s devotees has given a large gift. Those who give fruits, leaves, vegetables, food or garments to Viṣṇu’s devotees, are always blessed on the earth. Those who have worshipped Viṣṇu’s devotee, have worshipped all. Those who have worshipped Viṣṇu, are said to be most blessed. Merely by seeing them a man is absolved of sins. O brāhmaṇa, what is the use of telling other things repeatedly? Therefore, seeing and touching them gives joy. As is Viṣṇu so is this devotee (of him). There is no difference between them. O child, realising this, a wise man should always honour (a devotee of Viṣṇu). There is no doubt that he who feeds but one brāhmaṇa devotee of Viṣṇu, has fed a thousand brāhmaṇas.


