+++
title = "070 The Vow of Nadī-trirātra"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1\. O lord of gods, O lord of the Universe, O you who give pleasures and salvation, O you greatest god, tell me (that) due to which (a man) does not experience grief.

## *Maheśa said*:

2-10. Listen, O brāhmaṇa, I shall tell you the vow of the river observed for three nights, having observed which, men do not go to hell. A man, having obtained (long) life, (good) health, matchless good fortune, happiness and wealth, so also inexhaustible (i.e. continuous) progeny, is honoured in heaven. When the month of Āṣāḍha comes the river is full of water. She is well-known in the Purāṇa to be constantly full of water. In the rainy season, when (the sky) is full of clouds, she should be (served) with a vow. When the river is full with all (kinds of) water, the vow intended for three nights should be carefully observed. As is liked by one¹, one should see her for three days. On the bank of a water place, when the river is flooded (he should bathe); or should carry home that water in a black pitcher. O brāhmaṇa, a wise man, having gone to the river in the morning, should bathe there, if he is able to fast for three nights. If he is unable (to fast), he should fast by eating once a day. He should offer lamp regularly, and worship (Viṣṇu) in the morning and evening. Uttering the name of the great river and ofVaruṇa, and placing (mentally) Viṣṇu, lying in water,

11-25. (he should say:) “Salutation to the deity, O Gaṅgā, O Gautamī; O river, O Sindhu, Kāverī, Sarasvatī, Salutation to you. Repeated salutations to Tāpī, Payoṣṇī, Pūrṇā, Mehendrasukhadā [Māhendrasukhadā?] (delighting Indra), Kāśyapī, Gaṇḍakī and to river Sindhu. Salutation to (you), O Varuṇa, living in water and dear to Viṣṇu. O lord of the aquatic animals, O lord of water, always grant me well-being. Accept the respectful offering made by me. Give me the desired fruit.” He should also make offering of food with pumpkin gourds, coconuts, and other auspicious fruits produced in the season. (He should say:) “Salutation to you, O Keśava, O Ananta. Salutation to you lying in water. O lord, protect me. O Govinda, grant me a boon.” Thus he should, in proper order, and at proper time, worship (the deity). He being pure, and having observed the three-night vow, should break the fast after worshipping the deity and should use a vessel full of water, with fruits, flowers. O learned one, he should, along with women, children and men, with songs, musical instruments and pitchers full of river (water) and placing it at every watery place worship it with fruits and flowers.[^1] So also with various kinds of grains and sprinklings of water. Having carefully come home laughing, singing and dancing, he should worship bamboo-baskets filled with seven (kinds of) grains. According to his capacity he should fill seven, five or three (baskets). Desiring his well-being, he should not drink river water for three nights. At the time of breaking the fast food to be eaten during certain holidays or days of fast should be procured. After bath is taken or worship is done the water of the river should not be used. Give pure food and eatables in three groups. So also (give) seven bamboo-baskets and seven water-pitchers also. He should eat food eaten on days of fast and without acrid or sweet taste. He should carefully avoid food with beans and ground with stone. O best brāhmaṇa, thus the vow should be observed for three years. When the three years are over, he should conclude it in this way:

[^1]:  The reading is obscure.

26-32. O Nārada, he should give a (brāhmaṇa) couple a black cow, with a black (piece of) cloth and sesamum-seeds. Having thus given (these) to a (brāhmaṇa) couple he should also give gold (to the couple) according to his capacity. O Nārada, he should fashion golden image of Varuṇa, as the form of a river, and a fully auspicious circle (in honour) of Varuṇa. He should place there a pitcher along with presents. Having worshipped it that is placed there, he should duly and devoutly worship it and then give it to a brāhmaṇa. He should in accordance with his wealth and capacity feed the brāhmaṇas, so also his preceptor who is of respectable character and who is engaged in (the study of) all sacred texts. When this is done, the vow would be complete, O learned one. He would have unending good fortune, happiness, wealth and children. He never meets with a calamity, and is, for a long time, honoured in heaven. This (vow) was observed by wives of gods and of sages also. Formerly, the nāga-women and siddha-women had observed this vow. This vow of the Nadī-trirātra is matchless. What else do you wish to hear? He certainly always obtains good fortune and children.



