+++
title = "072 Merit of Reciting the Viṣṇusahasranāma"

+++
 

## *Śrī Mahādeva said*:

1-8. O daughter of the Himālaya mountain, if brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas or śūdras recite this especially every day, they, having wealth and grains go to the highest position of Viṣṇu. By reciting a verse, half a verse, a line, or half a line a man goes to salvation (and stays there) till the universal deluge. O goddess, those best men who recite the thousand names of Viṣṇu with a special commitment, go to the imperishable position (of Viṣṇu). The wealth and the (span of) life of him who recites it once, twice or thrice (a day), increase till the (end of the regime of) fourteen Indras. He would obtain sons, grandsons, and large wealth and affluence. O you beautiful one, what is the use of repeatedly saying other things? The thousand names of Viṣṇu give the highest bliss. A man who has first offered him worship fully, has offered him worship (every day) for a year, when Viṣṇu is worshipped(?). There should be no distraction especially while reciting (the hymn). If a distraction is had while reciting it, (the span of) the life and wealth (of the reciter) decrease.

9-17. As many sacred places as there always are on the Jambū Dvīpa, (all) those are (present) just there (where) the thousand names of Viṣṇu (are recited). Just there is Gaṅgā. There is Yamunā. There is Veṇī; there is Godāvarī; there is Sarasvatī. (Thus) all sacred places exist there where are (recited) the thousand names of Viṣṇu. This (hymn) is very pure; it is always dear to the devotees. With the mind full of the feeling of (being Viṣṇu’s) servant and with devotion it should always be called to mind. Those wise ones who recite (this hymn) called *Viṣṇusahasranāma* (‘the thousand names of Viṣṇu’), reach, after being free from all sins, Viṣṇu’s proximity. The (span of the) life, strength and wealth of those who every day recite it at dawn, increase. A devotee of Viṣṇu, keeping awake during the night in the Kali age, obtains salvation as long as fourteen Indras (rule). That worship offered to Viṣṇu, for Tulasī, with (the utterance of) each name of Viṣṇu, should be known to be the worship superior to a crore of sacrifices. O Pārvatī, those brāhmaṇas who recite it while going along the way, have indeed no sins of the journey. O goddess, listen, I shall tell (you) the greatness of Viṣṇu. Those best men who listen to it are meritorious and are of the form of merit.


