+++
title = "073 Rāmarakṣā Stotra"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-12. Om, the great sage Viśvāmitra is the seer of the hymn called *Rāmarakṣā*. Śrī Rāma is the deity. The metre is anuṣṭup. Application of the muttering of this hymn (is) for pleasing Viṣṇu. I meditate upon the imperishable Viṣṇu, Śrī Rāma, having lotus-like eyes, resembling atasī flower, wearing a yellow garment and infallible. May Rāma protect (my) heart. May Śrīkaṇṭha protect my throat. May the protector of the sacrifice protect my navel. May the protector of the universe protect my waist. May Daśaratha’s son protect my hands. May he, of a universal form, protect my feet. May the excellent god, the lord of Sītā protect my eyes. May the universal soul protect the tuft of hair on (my) head. May he who gives desired objects, protect (my) ears. May the protector of gods protect (my) sides. May he, inaccessible to a crore of deaths, and eternal lord of the universe always protect (my) body. May he who destroys sins and propagates instruction in the world, protect (my) tongue. May Rāghava protect this. May Keśava protect (my) hair. May he, the creator of the universe and called Dattavijaya, protect (my) thighs. A man who would recite this (hymn called Rāma-)rakṣā, endowed with Rāma’s power, would have a long life; would be happy, learned, and get divine wealth. (This hymn) the Rakṣā, sacred to Viṣṇu, always protects all beings. A man who would remember ‘Rāma, Rāmabhadra, Rāmacandra’ is free from sins and obtains eternal salvation. This (hymn) was told by Vasiṣṭha to his preceptor of the form of Viṣṇu. Then from Brahmā it came to me; and I told it to Nārada. Nārada brought it down among the good people on the earth. Those best men who, while resting at home or going along the way, recite this, enjoy religious merit.


