+++
title = "079 The Importance of Apamārjana"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-16. The sprinkling (called Apamārjana) is divine and very wonderful. It (i.e. the hymn) should be recited especially for fulfilling the desire of having a son. A wise man should recite this hymn for fulfilling all his desires. The life, wealth and strength of those twice-borns who recite it once, twice or thrice a day, increase. A brāhmaṇa obtains knowledge; and a kṣatriya gets a kingdom. A vaiśya obtains wealth and prosperity, and a śūdra gets devotion—others also get devotion by reciting, listening to, and muttering it. O daughter of the (Himālaya) Mountain, he gets the fruit (of the recital) of Sāmadeva. Just at that moment only the entire multitude of his sins perishes. O goddess, knowing this, people, being calm, should recite it. Certainly they have sons and full wealth. That devotee of Viṣṇu who, writing it on a birch-leaf, has it (on his person), goes to Viṣṇu’s highest position after having enjoyed happiness in this world. He who, having recited one verse, would offer it to Tulasī, has visited all holy places on his having worshipped Tulasī. This great hymn belongs to Viṣṇu and gives salvation. Being recited it resembles the gift of land, and the person (who recites it) goes to the world of Viṣṇu. He should especially recite the hymn with a desire to go to Viṣṇu’s world. Men, being composed, should recite it for the (long) life of the children. It brings about peace to the children who are overcome by diseases and imps (or Planets). Being possessed by a ghost, so also (the influence of) poison, perishes just on its recital. That brāhmaṇa who, having put a Tulasī-garlaad round his neck, would recite it, should be known as a devotee of Viṣṇu, and he goes to the world of Viṣṇu. That brāhmaṇa who has (on his body) the marks of a conch, a disc etc., who has the (Tulasī) garland round his neck, and who always recites this hymn, is said to be a devotee of Viṣṇu. On leaving this world he goes to Viṣṇu’s world. He is free from delusion, illusion, hypocrisy and thirst (i.e. desires). A man should recite this divine hymn. He would obtain the highest bliss. Those brāhmaṇas who are known to be the devotees of Viṣṇu are blessed on the earth. There is no doubt that they have emancipated themselves with their family. They, highly devoted to Viṣṇu, are most fortunate in the world. They should always be devoted (to Viṣṇu). They are the followers of the lord (i.e. Viṣṇu).


