+++
title = "081 The Importance of Gaṅgā"

+++
 

## *Pārvatī said*:

1-2. O you very intelligent one, tell (me) again the importance of Gaṅgā, having repeatedly heard which, all the sages are free from attachment. O lord, O master of all, what kind of greatness is of her? I have formerly learnt about her origin. I have (however) not heard about her greatness. You are the first among all beings and the ancient god.

## *Mahādeva said*:

3-11. The sages came to see Bhīṣma, resembling Bṛhaspati in intelligence, Indra in valour, and lying on the bed of arrows. (The sages were:) Atri, Vasiṣṭha, Bhṛgu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Aṅgiras, Gautama, Agastya, and Sumati, the wise one; Viśvāmitra, the omniscient Sthūlaśiras, the chief of the Pramathas, Raibhya, Bṛhaspati, Vyāsa, Pavana, Kaśyapa, Dhruva, Durvāsas, Jamadagni, Mārkaṇḍeya, Gālava, Uśanas, Bhāradvāja, Kratu and Āstīka also, Sthūlākṣa, Sarvalokākṣa, Kaṇva, Medhātithi, Kuśa, Nārada, Parvata, Sudhanvā and the brāhmaṇa, Cyavana, Matibhū, Bhuvana, Dhaumya, Śatānanda, Kṛtavraṇa, Jāmadagnya Rāma, Ṛcīka and others. Dharma’s son, along with his younger brothers duly saluted him, and duly honoured them, venerable to the world. The noble ones, with penance as their treasure, when honoured, were seated comfortably, and had talks about Bhīṣma and divine way of life. At the end of the talks of the sages of purified souls, Yudhiṣṭhira, having saluted Bhīṣma by (bowing) his head, asked this:

## *Yudhiṣṭhira said*:

12\. O grandsire, tell me which countries are very holy, which mountains and hermitages should always be resorted to by those who seek religious merit.

## *Bhīṣma said*:

13-23. In this matter only they relate the history—the dialogue between (Śibi) gleaning ears of corn and a siddha, O king Yudhiṣṭhira. A siddha having walked about this entire earth, reached the house of the noble Śibi, (living by) gleaning ears of corn. He knew the essence of metaphysics; he had always curbed his senses. He had given up attachment and hatred, and was proficient in wise acts. He was always the best among the devotees of Viṣṇu. He was very much devoted to holy acts about Viṣṇu. He did not censure Viṣṇu’s devotees. He was always devoted to righteousness. He was always engaged in yogic practices. He wore (the marks of) a conch and a disc. He knew the truth of worshipping the deity three times a day, and he was always devoted to Viṣṇu. He deliberated about what is right and what is wrong with those learned in Vedic lores. He always recited the Vedas; and always honoured (his) guests. Thinking of (visiting) a holy place, he always subsisted on gleaned corn. That brāhmaṇa having the form of Viṣṇu, knew all that was reflected upon and sung by the self-born one. He was proficient in the significance of various ways of life, and was always inclined to the Immutable. Once he went to Śibi’s house. The noble-minded (Śibi) seeing him, offered him due hospitality. (Then) Sibi asked him the cause of the auspiciousness of the regions. (Śibi) who gleaned ears of com, said: “O best brāhmaṇa, please tell me affectionately (i.e. due to your affection for me), which countries, regions, mountains, and hermitages are auspicious.”

## *The siddha said*:

24-42. Those countries, regions, mountains, and hermitages in which the best river Gaṅgā is always present, are auspicious. That good position (i.e. obtaining heaven) which one would get by resorting to Gaṅgā is not obtained by penance, celibacy, sacrifice and gifts. That pleasure which is had by those self-governed people bathing in Gaṅgā, is not had by means of hundreds of sacrifices. A man swimming (i.e. bathing) in the water of Gaṅgā shines after removing his sins, as the sun shines at his rise by dispelling darkness. O brāhmaṇa, as a heap of cotton having reached (i.e. come in contact with) fire perishes, similarly a dip in Gaṅgā removes all sins. He who would drink the Gaṅgā-water heated by the sun’s rays, is equivalent to one free from mist and is superior to fire. The man who has bathed in Gaṅgā is superior to the man who has observed the Cāndrāyaṇa vow standing on one foot. The best man who uses the Gaṅgā-water for a month (is superior to) the man who stands with his head down for a myriad years. Being free from (the sin of) a brāhmaṇa’s murder he goes to Viṣṇu’s (position). This Gaṅgā destroys sins like the confluence of Gaṅgā, Yamunā and Sarasvatī. By merely remembering her, the killer of an infant is freed in a moment. That Prayāga, the lord ofthe holy places, is difficult to be secured by the devotees of Viṣṇu. Having bathed there a man would quickly go to Vaikuṇṭha. He does not know (i.e. care for) what is dear and what is not dear. He does not obtain religious merit or sin. Having bathed in Gaṅgā, one is freed from a great sin. He who would say ‘Gaṅgā, Gaṅgā’ even from hundreds of yojanas (away from Gaṅgā), is free from all sins and goes to Viṣṇu’s world. A killer of a brāhmaṇa, of a cow, a drunkard, a killer of an infant is free from all sins and quickly goes to heaven. He also sees excellent Viṣṇu. He who bathes at the confluence of Gaṅgā, Yamunā and Sarasvatī goes to Vaikuṇṭha. As darkness vanishes when the sun rises, in the same way sins perish just by bathing in her. By bathing at Gaṅgāvarta, Kuśāvarta, Gallika, Nīlaparvata, at the holy place of Kanakhala, there is no birth. O king, the best man, knowing like this, and repeatedly bathing in Gaṅgā, is freed from sin. Viṣṇu is always the best among gods, horse-sacrifice among sacrifices, Aśvattha among all trees, similarly Gaṅgā is always (the best among rivers).


