+++
title = "083 The Swing Festival"

+++
 

## *Pārvatī said*:

1-3. O Maheśvara, tell me about the rites (performed) in all months. A great festival is to be celebrated (in these months). Which is the accepted manner (in which the festival is to be celebrated)? O lord of gods, tell me which the deity is who is to be worshipped, what his greatness would be, and on which day (of the month) it is to be performed. What is told to the devotees of Viṣṇu of meritorious deeds about the month? I am blessed, I am fortunate, I am lucky on the earth, that I (shall) hear the story of Viṣṇu (from you) by seeing you and coming in your contact.

## *Śiva said*:

4-18. I shall, O sinless one, tell you the mode of the festivals, hearing which you will be delighted as by songs and musical instruments. First, especially on the Ekādaśī of the bright fortnight of the very auspicious month of Caitra one should worship (Viṣṇu) mounted on a swing. O goddess, one should always devoutly celebrate the festival according to the rule. They (who) see Kṛṣṇa, remover of the blemishes of the Kali age, mounted upon the swing, are, O daughter of the (Himālaya) Mountain, free from thousands of offences. The sins committed during crores of existences remain as long as one would not swing god (Viṣṇu), the lord of the universe, the master of the universe. Those who in the Kali age see Janārdana mounted upon the swing, are freed even though (they have committed) the sin of killing a cow. What then can be said about others? Gods, along with Rudra, being delighted at the swing festival, jubilantly dance, sing, and play upon musical instruments in the courtyard. Sages, the attendants of Śiva, gandharvas, the groups of the celestial nymphs like Rambhā, so also the serpents led by Vāsuki, so also deities and chief gods, desiring to see Viṣṇu come to the swing (festival). On the swing (festival) day in the vernal season beings are present for (i.e. at the time of) the swing festival, and O great goddess, those belonging to a heavenly stock also certainly go (there) when (the image of) Kṛṣṇa is (placed) on the swing. Seeing Viṣṇu on the swing, there is a festival for the three worlds. Therefore, giving up a hundred other occupations celebrate a festival on the swing (festival) day. Prahlāda comes there. Viṣṇu mounts on the swing, O great goddess. Remembering him who grants a boon (one should celebrate the festival). Those who keep awake (on that night) remembering Kṛṣṇa on the swing, receive the fruit of all their religious merit in a moment. Those who see Viṣṇu on the swing in the spring, being saluted by the god of gods, play with Viṣṇu. One seeing (the image of) the god facing the south and mounted on the swing, O goddess, is free from (the sin of) the murder of a brāhmaṇa on seeing Viṣṇu (just) once. ‘Om, we know the god mounted on the swing. We think of Mādhava. May that god urge us on’. This is the worship with the Gāyatrī (hymn).

19-34. ‘Repeated salutations to Mādhava, Govinda, Śrīkaṇṭha’. The worship should be done to the accompaniment of the hymn and according to the rule. Being composed he should give a gift to his preceptor according to his capacity. He should devoutly sing (the praise) of Viṣṇu; then the (worship) will be complete. O you beautiful lady, what is the use of repeatedly saying other things? Viṣṇu remaining on the swing removes all sins. He, worshipped properly by men, always gives everything. Where (Viṣṇu) remains on the swing, gods, and kinnaras with gandharvas come there. There is no doubt about this. There he should worship Viṣṇu with the hymn, *Om, Namo Bhagavate Vāsudevāya* (‘Om, Salutation to the lord Vāsudeva’). With this hymn he should worship (Viṣṇu). He should do the worship according to. the rale and in sixteen ways of doing homage (to Viṣṇu). All his desires for virtue, material welfare etc. would certainly get fulfilled. O you of a good vow, all that like the assignment of (the various parts of) the body, hand etc., should be done with (i.e. to the accompaniment) of this hymn. The festival should be celebrated with the hymn as told in the holy text. He should keep (the image of) the deity (Viṣṇu) along with Lakṣmī on the swing. In front of (the image of) the deity he should install (the images of) Nārada etc.—the divine sages. So also the devotees like Viśvaksena should always be installed in the front. The wise one should wave the light with the sound of five musical instruments. O goddess, in every watch he should be carefully worshipped. He should offer him respectful offering with coconuts and white banana plants. He should be carefully worshipped, O goddess. ‘O god of gods, O lord of the world, O holder of a conch, a disc and a mace, accept the worship. Favour me.’ The remnants of the offering should be given to Viṣṇu’s devotees. The devotees of Viṣṇu should play upon musical instruments and dance there. Then especially the swinging (of the swing) should be done. O goddess, all the holy and sacred places that are there on the earth, come there to witness (the festival) on that day. Knowing like this, O goddess, the great festival should be celebrated. O you daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain, brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, śūdras and all other castes should be looked upon to be holding a conch, a disc, a mace.


