+++
title = "087 Monthly Offering of Flowers to Viṣṇu"

+++
 

## *Maheśvara said*:

1-13. In Caitra Viṣṇu who removes sufferings should be carefully worshipped with campaka or jasmine flowers. One should worship the lord of the worlds, the lord of the lords of all, viz. Viṣṇu, with damanaka, maruka, and bilva flowers. Or (one) being very calm, should (worship him) with divine, red lotuses. O chief goddess, men worship Viṣṇu in the month of Caitra. O goddess, and in Vaiśākha the great lord should always be worshipped. He who has devoutly worshipped Viṣṇu, taking (i.e. with) a ketakī-leaf, when the Sun is in the sign Taurus of the Zodiac, is pleased for a hundred ages of Manu. When the month of Jyeṣṭha comes, he should worship (Viṣṇu) with various flowers. When the lord of gods is worshipped, all gods are worshipped well. They too, (even) after having committed thousands of (minor) sins and hundreds of major sins, will go there where Viṣṇu dwells with Lakṣmī. When the month of Āṣāḍha comes, they should especially worship (Viṣṇu). Those men who always worship Viṣṇu with (flowers of) karavīra, red flowers and lotuses, are meritorious. Those who will worship Viṣṇu with gold-like flowers and kadamba flowers, have no fear from (Śani) the Sun’s son. Viṣṇu worshipped with kadamba flowers at the advent of the rainy season, gives desired objects as long as the fourteen Indras (last). Viṣṇu, the creator of the world, becomes as pleased on having kadamba flower(s) as by obtaining Lakṣmī. O best goddess, Viṣṇu worshipped with Tulasī, black Tulasī and aśoka flowers, always removes (the devotee’s) affliction. (Viṣṇu is pleased with them) who worship him when the month of Śrāvaṇa comes with hemp-flower or dūrvā-blade.

14-27. He should especially be carefully worshipped with various flowers. He gives many desired objects till the final deluge. O daughter of the (Himālaya) Mountain, listen. When the month of Bhādrapada comes, he who worships Viṣṇu with campaka flowers, white flowers and red sindūra flowers, with white lotuses, O great goddess, would obtain the fruit of all his desires. In the auspicious month of Āśvina worship to Viṣṇu should be offered with jasmine flowers, so also with various kinds of flowers. (Viṣṇu) should be carefully and devoutly worshipped by all people. Those men who by bringing lotuses only worship Viṣṇu, obtain on the earth religious merit, worldly prosperity, sensual enjoyments and salvation. When the month of Kārtika comes, the great lord should be worshipped. As many seasonal flowers as are there should be offered to Viṣṇu. With sesamum and sesamum flowers he should offer worship. When the lord of gods is pleased, the man obtains unending fruit. Those who worship Viṣṇu in Kārtika with bakula flowers, punnāga and campaka flowers are gods, and not men. In Mārgaśīrṣa the lord should always be worshipped with various flowers, offerings of eatables, incense and waving lights. In Mārgaśīrṣa he should worship Viṣṇu especially with divine flowers. O great goddess, in the month of Pauṣa good worship with various Tulasī leaves and water mixed with musk should be done, and when the month ofMāgha has come, he should worship Viṣṇu with various flowers. When the supreme lord of the gods is worshipped, a man certainly gets his desired object. The worship should be done with camphor or various eatables like sweetmeats. When Phālguna comes, Viṣṇu’s worship should be done. He should fully perform the vernal worship after bringing flowers, or, O chief goddess, he should worship him with new flowers. When the lord of the world is worshipped, a man gets the eternal position of Viṣṇu by Viṣṇu’s favour.


