+++
title = "088 Dialogue Between Satyabhāmā and Kṛṣṇa"

+++
 

Hereafter (the narration of) the importance of the month of Kārtika is commenced.

## *Sūta said*:

1-17. Once the sage (Nārada) came taking with him divine flowers and (those) of the desire-yielding tree to Dvārakā to see Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa welcomed and honoured Nārada. Offering him a seat, he said: “This is a respectful offering; this is water for washing your feet.” And Nārada offered those flowers to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa distributed them among (his) sixteen thousand wives. The lord, forgetting Satyabhāmā, gave them to all (other wives). Then getting angry Satyabhāmā entered the anger-chamber. Calm Kṛṣṇa knowing that went there and bringing Satyabhāmā, he mentally recollected Garuḍa. By merely being remembered, Garuḍa, coming there, stood before him. Having quickly mounted on the bird, the lord said to his dear (wife Satyabhāmā): “O Satyā, do not be angry; for you, opposing the lord of gods with the deities, I shall plant the desire-yielding tree in your courtyard. O noble one, pardon my fault.” Making a pledge like this with Satyabhāmā, he quickly went to the world of deities (i.e. heaven) where that god (Indra), the killer of Vṛtra, was. Being solicited for the desire-yielding tree, (Indra) replied to the lord: “O god, O lord, it is not proper for you to take this tree to the earth.” Then the large-armed (Kṛṣṇa) took out the tree from (i.e. with) the root, and the very strong one put it on his vehicle (i.e. Garuḍa). Then the wielder of the thunderbolt (i.e. Indra), the strong (god), speedily raised the thunderbolt and struck Garuḍa (with it saying:) “Leave the desire-yielding tree”. Then Garuḍa, to honour the thunderhold, dropped one feather. Due to that stroke of the thunderbolt, three birds (animals?) sprang up: the peacock, the mongoose and the blue jay. Kṛṣṇa went to Dvārakā. Having come, he planted it in Satyabhāmā’s house. Then only Nārada came and was very much honoured by Satyā.

## *Satyabhāmā said*:

(Please) tell me how I should get such a desire-yielding tree and such a husband as the lord in every existence.

Thus asked, Nārada, the best sage, then said: “O Satyabhāmā, he is obtained by means of the gift of tulāpuruṣa.” Then Satyabhāmā having weighed Kṛṣṇa according to the precept in the holy text, gave (the articles equal to his weight) along with the desiring-yielding tree to Nārada. Taking all the articles, Nārada went to heaven.

## *Sūta said*:

18\. When Nārada had gone after bidding farewell to Kṛṣṇa, Satyā with her face blooming with joy said to Kṛṣṇa:

## *Satyabhāmā said*:

19-25a. I am blessed; I am fortunate. My existence is fruitful. My parents who certainly produced me as the (most) favourite wife in the three worlds, are lucky in being the cause of my birth, as I am (most) dear to you among (your) sixteen thousand wives. (I am lucky) since I duly gave, according to the rite as told (in the holy text), (the articles equal to the weight of) the lord of creation with the desire-yielding tree to Nārada. That desire-yielding tree whose account the beings on the earth perhaps know, now stands in my house(?). I am also very dear to Kṛṣṇa, the lord of the three worlds. Therefore, O Madhusūdana, I desire to ask you something. If you are my benefactor, then tell this in detail. Hearing that I shall again do what is beneficial to me, so that, O god, I shall never be separated from you till (the end of) the kalpa.

## *Sūta said*:

25b-27. Hearing these words of his dear (wife), Kṛṣṇa, with a smile on his face, put his hand into that of Satyā, and went with pleasure to the foot of the desiring-yielding tree with his beloved after having forbidden his attendants (to follow them). Having laughed and called Satyā, the lord of the worlds with the hair on his body bristling and with horripilation spoke (to her) to please and delight her.

## *Kṛṣṇa said*:

28-30. O dear one, out of my sixteen thousand wives no beautiful lady other than you is dear to me. You are (just) like my life. For you I had a quarrel with (Indra) the lord of gods along with the (other) deities. Listen, O dear one; (I shall give you) whatever is solicited by you, whether it is small or big, even if it cannot be (easily) given, done, or expressed. Then, O dear one, how shall I not tell (i.e. give the answer to) the question put by you? Ask everything that is in your mind. I shall tell (i.e. answer) it.

## *Satyā said*:

31-33. Formerly (i.e. in my previous existence) which gift (did I give), which vow (did I observe), or which penance did I practise, that I, a mortal, have become like Pārvatī in this mortal (world), and that I always occupy half (the portion) of your body, always ride Garuḍa, and went with you to the abode of deities like Indra? Therefore, I desire to ask you, what auspicious (act) I did in the other (i.e. previous) existence, what (kind of) character I had, and whose daughter I was.

## *Śrīkṛṣṇa said*:

34-45. O dear one, listen attentively. I shall tell you all about the auspicious vow you observed in your former existence. At the end of the Kṛta age in Māyāpurī there was an excellent brāhmaṇa of Atri’s family, Devaśarman by name, who had mastered the Vedas and the Vedāṅgas. He was hospitable. He attended (sacred) fire. He was greatly devoted to the vow (in honour) of the Sun. Actually being like another Sun, he everyday propitiated the Sun. The old man had a daughter, Guṇavatī by name. Being sonless, he gave his daughter to his disciple named Candra(śarman). He (i.e. Devaśarman) looked upon him as his (own) son, and he who had controlled his passions, looked upon him as his father. The two, desiring to collect kuśas and fuel, once went to a forest. The two then roamed in the forest at the foot of the Himālaya mountain. Then they saw a fierce demon coming (to them). With their entire body overcome by fear, and unable to run (away), they were killed by the demon with Death-like form. My attendants, moving with me, took them to Vaikuṇṭha-abode due to the efficacy of the region and their religiousness. I was indeed very much pleased with them by virtue of just that act of them, viz. they, as long as they were alive, worshipped the Sun etc. As the rainwater goes to the ocean, the followers of Śiva, the Sun, Gaṇeśa, Viṣṇu, so also the worshippers of Śakti come \|to me only. I am one, born in five ways, and play with names—as one Devadatta calls his sons etc. with (various) names. Then the two lived in my house; moved in an aeroplane; had the brilliance of the Sun; resembled me in form; were near me; enjoyed divine beautiful women and pleasures like (being smeared with) sandal.


