+++
title = "089 An Account of Satyabhāmā’s Former Birth"

+++
 

## *Śrīkṛṣṇa said*:

1-4. Then Guṇavatī, after hearing that the two were killed by a demon, being overcome by grief for her father and husband, lamented piteously: “O lord, O father, where have you gone leaving me (and) without me? Today without you what should I, a young helpless girl, do? Who will affectionately look after me who am adept in nothing, who am grieved, who am living in the house with food, covering etc.? I am unlucky; my happiness is destroyed; my lord is killed; my life is doomed. To whom should I, a helpless young (woman), resort to today?”

## *Srīkṛṣṇā said*:

5-14. Thus having very much lamented like a much afflicted osprey she, being dispirited, fell on the ground like a plantain tree struck by (stormy) wind. Having revived after a long time and lamenting on the ground very piteously, she plunged into the ocean of grief and was overcome by it. She, doing auspicious acts, sold all domestic articles and performed the rites beneficial to the two in the next world. She, highly devoted to Viṣṇu, calm, truthful, pure and with her senses controlled, lived in that city only and sustained her life. From birth till death she properly observed two vows: the vow of Ekādaśī and the vow of (i.e. relating to) Kārtika. O dear one, this couple of vows is very dear to me. It properly brings about pleasures and salvation, and sons and wealth. Those, even being great sinners, who, in the month of Kārtika, when the Sun is in Libra, bathe everyday in the morning, are released. Those men who sweep their house and present (the auspicious sign of) svastika etc. to Viṣṇu and worship Viṣṇu, are liberated while alive. Those men who bathe, keep awake, offer lights, resort to the Tulasī-grove,in Kārtika are the forms of Viṣṇu. Those who do like this even for three days in Kārtika, are venerable even to gods. What to say of them who have done it from birth!

15-30. In this way Guṇavatī, always devoted to Viṣṇu’s followers, and having fixed her mind on him, passed every year. O dear one, once she who was emaciated due to old age and was tormented by fever, slowly, somehow, went to Gaṅgā to bathe. When, after she got into the water, she trembled and was oppressed by cold and frightened, she saw an aeroplane that came from the sky. From the sky it approached with (beings) having Viṣṇu’s form, having conches, discs and maces in their hands, and properly marked with banners having (the pictures of) eagles. She got into the aeroplane served by a bevy of celestial nymphs. The attendants took her being fanned by chowries, to Vaikuṇṭha. Then she, like the flame of a blazing fire, who was in the aeroplane, obtained my proximity due to the religious merit of the Kārtika vow. Then all the attendants went with me coming to the earth by the request of the deities like Brahmā. O beautiful young lady, all these Yādavas are my attendants only. Your father became (i.e. was born as) this king Satrājit. He who was Candraśarman (became) Akrūra, and you are that Guṇavatī, O auspicious one. Due to the merit of the Kārtika vow, you very much enhance my love. At my door you had formerly made this Tulasī grove. From that this desire-yielding tree has come up in your courtyard, O auspicious one. Since formerly in Kārtika you made illumination, therefore, this Lakṣmī living in your house, has become steady. Since you offered all that vow etc. to Viṣṇu of the from of your husband, therefore, you have become my wife. Due to that vow only which you formerly (i.e. in the former existence) observed in Kārtika, from birth till death, you will never be separated from me. Thus, those men who are highly engrossed in the Kārtika vow, also come near me, as you, causing delight to me (have come). Men performing sacrifices, giving gifts, observing vows, practising penance do not indeed get even a portion of the merit which one gets by the Kārtika vow.

Having thus, at that time, heard (the words) of the lord of the world, Satyā, delighted due to the grandeur produced in the former meritorious existence, saluted the lord of the universe, Kṛṣṇa, who was the only cause of the three worlds, and spoke (those) words.


