+++
title = "098 Viṣṇu Promises not to Kill Jalandhara"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1\. Seeing the demon to have come again, gods with Indra trembled with fear and started praising Viṣṇu.

## *Gods said*:

2-4. Obeisance to you who are always ready for (serving) the purpose of the devotee by (taking) many forms like that of the Fish or the Tortoise; (to you) who remove affliction, who are the author of the Creator etc., the creation, maintenance and destruction (of the world); who have in your hands a mace, a conch, a lotus etc. We bow to you, lord of Ramā (i.e. Lakṣmī), the killer of the demons, the lord of the first among the serpents (i.e. Śeṣa), (to you) wearing a yellow garment, maturing the rites like a sacrifice etc., the great author (of everything), fit to be resorted to. Salutation to that Viṣṇu, the thunderbolt of Indra for destroying the mountain of the grief of the gods tormented by the demons, (to Viṣṇu) lying on the bed of the lord of serpents, having two eyes in the form of the Sun and the Moon. We salute him.

## *Nārada said*:

5-7. He who would everyday recite (this) hymn, destroying calamities, is never troubled by calamities due to Viṣṇu’s grace. When the gods thus praised (Viṣṇu) the enemy of the demons, Viṣṇu came to know about the calamity of the gods. The enemy of the demons, getting up quickly with his mind dejected through pity, quickly mounted upon Garuḍa, and said (these) words to Lakṣmī.

## *Viṣṇu said*:

8\. Your brother Jalandhara has played havoc among the gods. Invited by them, I shall quickly go to fight.

## *Lakṣmī said*:

9\. O you treasure of compassion, O my lord, if I am always dear to you and your devotee, then how should my brother be killed by you in a battle?

## *The lord said*:

10\. Due to his being born from a portion of Rudra, due to Brahmā’s statement (about him), and due to your love (for him), Jalandhara shall never be killed by me.

## *Nārada said*:

11-19. Speaking like this, Viṣṇu holding a conch, a disc, a mace and a sword, mounted upon Garuḍa, and went there where the gods were praising him. The demons tormented by the wind (produced) by the very strong wings of (Garuḍa) whose younger brother is Aruṇa wandered like the clouds in the sky turned round by a storm. Then Jalandhara, seeing the demons tormented, did not utter a word, (but) angrily came to Viṣṇu. Then a great fight took place between Viṣṇu and the lord of demons, making the sky having no room in it with their arrows. With volleys of arrows Viṣṇu cut off the demon’s banner, umbrella, bow and horses and struck him on his chest with one arrow. Then the demon having a mace in his hand, jumped quickly, struck Garuḍa on his head and knocked him down on the ground. Viṣṇu laughed and cut off the mace with his sword. (Just) then he struck on Viṣṇu’s strong heart (chest) with his strong fist. Then the two very strong ones had a hand-to-hand fight, resounding the earth with their arms, fists, and knees. Having thus fought for a very long time, the brave Viṣṇu spoke with a deep-sounding voice to the king of the demons.

## *Viṣṇu said*:

20\. O lord of demons, ask for a boon. Due to your valour I am pleased with you. I shall even give you what cannot be given—(ask for) whatever is in your mind.

## *Jalandhara said*:

21\. O brother-in-law, if you are pleased with me, then grant me this boon—with that my sister (Lakṣmī) and with your attendants, you stay in my house.

## *Nārada said*:

22-29. Saying “Let it be so”, the lord with all his divine attendants went with Lakṣmī to the city named Jalandhara. Jalandhara also putting the gods in the custody of the demons, gladly again came back to the earth. The Ocean’s son brought under his control whatever jewels belonged to the gods, gandharvas and siddhas. The strong one having placed the very strong Niśumbha in the Pātāla-abode took Śeṣa and others to the earth. Making the multitudes of gods, gandharvas, siddhas, yakṣas, demons and human beings the residents of his city, he ruled over the three worlds. Having thus subjugated the gods he righteously looked after his subjects like his own sons. When he was (thus) ruling righteously, no one was sick, no one was afflicted; similarly no one was weak, no one appeared helpless. When thus the lord of demons was righteously and properly ruling over the earth, some time, by chance, I went (to that city) to see his prosperity and to serve (Viṣṇu), Lakṣmī’s husband.


