+++
title = "099 Rāhu Acts as Messenger of Jalandhara"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1\. O best king, that lord of demons having duly and very devoutly honoured me, laughed and said (these) words.

## *Jalandhara said*:

2\. O sage, tell me why have you come here, O brāhmaṇa; so also what you have seen and where, and why you have come here.

## *Nārada said*:

3-16. O lord of demons, I had, by chance, gone to the peak of Kailāsa (mountain). There I met Śiva seated with Umā in the great forest of desire-yielding trees extended over a myriad of yojanas, crowded with hundreds of desire-yielding cows, and well-lit with the desire-yielding gem. Seeing the great wonder a thought then arose in my mind. Such abundance may or may not be anywhere in the three worlds. O lord of demons, great opulence is collected by you. With a desire to see that I have come here to you. Seeing this prosperity, except the jewels in the form of women of you, I certainly think that there is none else (as) rich as Śiva. Though celestial damsels and nāga damsels are under your control, yet they are not certainly like Pārvatī in beauty, in whose ocean of beauty formerly Brahmā got murged [?] and lost his fortitude. Who else can be compared with her? Formerly by her in the form of a bhilla woman was subjugated by means of penance (Śiva) who was without any attachment, who was Madana’s enemy, on whom the universe depends at his pleasure, (but) who wandered in the forest of her beauty. On repeatedly seeing her form at the time of creation, the Creator created the celestial nymphs. (But) no one resembled her. Therefore, she, the best one, is the prosperity of him, the enjoyer of the gems of women. O you lord of demons, you, the lord of all gems, (do) not (have a gem) like that.

When, having talked like this, I took his leave and left, the lord of the demons had his body tormented with the ‘fever’ of love on hearing about her beauty. Then he sent Siṃhikā’s son (Rāhu) as his messenger to Śiva. Then being deluded a little by Viṣṇu’s Māyā (illusory power) Rāhu went to Kailāsa, having the lustre of the moon in the bright half. But he obtained the lustre of the moon in the dark half through the totality of (the lustre) from his body (i.e. he fully resembled the moon in the dark half of the month). Śiva was informed (of his arrival), and by his order he was taken in by Nandin. Urged by the indication of the creeper-like brow (of Śiva), he said (these) words.

## *Rāhu said*:

17-19. O bull-bannered god, listen to the command of the lord served by serpents, master of the three worlds, master of all gems. “How can you, the naked one living in the cremation ground, wearing a string of heads, have this charming wife, the daughter of the Himālaya Mountain? I am the lord ofjewels; and she is called a gem among women. Therefore, she is proper for me and not for you eating (i.e. subsisting on) alms.”

## *Nārada said*.

20-26. When, at that time Rāhu was speaking like this, a fierce man, with a voice like that of the violent thunderbolt was produced from the space between the eye-brows of Śiva. His face was like that of a lion; his tongue was moving; his eyes were fiery; he was great; his hair was erect; his body was dry; he was, as it were, another Nṛsiṃha. He set about to eat him. Seeing him Rāhu overcome by fear, speedily ran out; but he seized him (i.e. Rāhu). Then that Rāhu of big arms said to the lord of the god of gods with a grave voice like (the sound of) the clouds: “Protect me who have sought your refuge. He has come to eat me, a brāṃkaṇa, O Mahādeva. O you, who love those that seek your refuge, protect me from him.” Hearing the words of that brāhmaṇa, Mahādeva then said: “He should not be killed, since, being a messenger, he is dependent upon another. Leave him” The man hearing these words, left Rāhu in the sky. Leaving Rahu the man respectfully said to Mahādeva.

## *The man said*:

27\. O master, hunger oppresses me. I am fully emaciated with hunger. O lord, order what I should eat.

## *The lord said*:

28a. Quickly eat the flesh of your hands and feet.

## *Nārada said*:

28b-30. When the man thus ordered by Śiva ate up the flesh of his hands and feet, and when he remained with the head only, Śiva, seeing him with the head left, was very much pleased, and with amazement said to that man of fierce acts:

## *The lord said*:

31\. Having the name of ‘Kīrtimukha’ always remain at my door. Those who do not honour you, do not do what is dear to me.

## *Nārada said*:

32-34. Since then Kīrtimukha remains at the door of the lord. The worship of those who do not honour him would be in vain. That Rāhu who was left by him fell on the Barbara region. Therefore, on the earth he is known as *Barbarodbhūta* Then Rāhu, thinking that he was reborn here, told all this done by Śiva to Jalandhara after approaching him.


