+++
title = "102 Jalandhara Plays a Trick"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1-12. Seeing that Vīrabhadra fallen, Rudra’s attendants leaving the battle through fear and crying came to Śiva. Then hearing the uproar of his attendants, Śiva having mounted on his bull and laughing a little, came to the battle. Seeing Śiva coming, the attendants roaring like lions, again returned (to the battlefield). In the battle they struck the demons with showers of arrows. All the demons, seeing the fierce Śiva, ran away as sins run away through fear on seeing him who observes the vow of Kārtika. Then Jalandhara, seeing the demons fleeing on the battlefield, angrily ran to Śiva and discharged thousands of arrows. Śumbha, Niśumbha, Aśvamukha, Kālanemi, Balāhaka, Khadgaroman, Pracaṇḍa and Ghasmara went (i.e. rushed) to Śiva. Śiva, seeing the army of his attendants covered with the darkness caused by the arrows (of the demons), cut off the volley of arrows and with his own arrows covered the sky. He then troubled the demons with the hurricanes of his arrows. With fierce and continuous volleys of arrows he knocked (them) on the ground. Similarly he angrily cut off the head of Khaḍgaroman with a battle-axe. With a club having a skull at the top he also cut into two Balāhaka’s head; and binding the demon Ghasmara with a noose, he knocked him down on the ground. Some were struck by the bull; some were driven away by the arrows. The demons, like elephants tormented by lions, could not stand (before Śiva). Then Jalandhara with his mind full of anger and a voice sharp like (the sound of) thunderbolt, quickly challenged (Śiva) in the battle.

## *Jalandhara said*:

13\. Fight with me today. What is the use of striking these? O you having matted hair, show me whatever might you have.

## *Nārada said*:

14-27. Speaking like this he struck Śiva with seventy arrows. He, laughing a little, cut them off before they reached (him) with sharp arrows. Then with seven (arrows) he cut off his horses, banners, umbrella and bow. He the powerful one, with his bow cut off and without his chariot, took a mace. Śiva ran (to him) and cut into two his mace with arrows. Yet, raising his fist he went to kill Śiva. (Just) then Śiva drove him away up to a krośa with the volleys of arrows. Then the demon Jalandhara, thinking Śiva to be stronger, created a gāndharvī illusion which was wonderful, and deluded Śiva. Then gandharvas and bevies of celestial nymphs sang and danced. They sounded musical instruments made of bell-metal, lutes and tabors with one another. Seeing that great wonder Rudra was deluded by the sound, and he did not even notice weapons dropped from his hands. The demon seeing Rudra concentrated, was overpowered by sexual desire, quickly went where Pārvatī was seated, after putting the very strong Śumbha and Niśumbha in (charge of) the battle. That Jalandhara became one having ten staff-like arms, five faces, three eyes, matted hair, and mounted upon a mighty bull. Then seeing Rudra coming, his beloved came from among her friends, and remained within the range of his sight. When the lord of demons saw Pārvatī of a charming body, he ejected his semen and his body became dull. Then Pārvatī, recognising him to be the demon, was overcome by fear, and vanished and went to Uttaramānasa. Not seeing her in a moment like a streak of lighting, he again quickly went to the battle(-field) where god Śiva stood. Then Pārvatī also mentally recollected the great Viṣṇu. Then the goddess saw him seated by her.

## *Pārvatī said*:

28\. O Viṣṇu, the demon Jalandhara has done a great wonder. Do you not know the act of that wicked-minded (demon)?

## *The lord said*:

29\. We are following the path shown by him only. Otherwise, he well-protected by (his wife’s) chastity would not be fit to be killed.

## *Nārada said*:

30-32. Speaking like this, Viṣṇu again went to Jalandhara city. And Śiva, followed by gandharvas remained in the battle. Seeing the illusion to have disappeared, he awoke. Then Śiva, with his mind amazed, again angrily went to fight Jalandhara. The demon too seeing Śiva to have come back again, covered him with volleys of arrows in the battle.


