+++
title = "110 The Story of Jaya and Vijaya"

+++
 

## *Dharmadatta said*:

1\. I have heard that Jaya and Vijaya are Viṣṇu’s doorkeepers. (But I do not know) what they did due to which they had these forms.

## *The two attendants said*:

2-14. Due to just being seen by Kardama, Devahūtī, Tṛṇabindu’s daughter, formerly gave birth to two sons, O brāhmaṇa. The elder one was Jaya byname, and the younger Vijaya. On (i.e. from) the other wife was born Kapila, a knower of yoga, and Dharma. Jaya and Vijaya were always engrossed in devotion to Viṣṇu. Controlling their senses, they were disposed to virtue. Everyday they both recited the eight-syllabled hymn and observed the Viṣṇu-vow. Viṣṇu always presented himself at their worship (of him). Sometime Marutta invited them for a sacrifice. They, skilled in performing a sacrifice, went there, being waited upon by divine sages. Jaya became the Brahmā priest and Vijaya the sacrificing priest. Then they fully accomplished the sacrificial rite. Marutta, after having bathed at the end of the sacrifice, gave them much wealth. Taking that wealth they went to their hermitage. O sage, then for worshipping and gratifying Viṣṇu they vied with each other and they divided the wealth. Jaya said: “Let it be divided into equal parts.” Vijaya said: “Whatever is received by one is one’s (share).” Then Jaya angrily and with his mind agitated, cursed Vijaya; “Since having received (the wealth) you are not giving it, therefore, be a crocodile.” Vijaya too, having heard that curse of (i.e. pronounced by) him, cursed him: “Be an elephant”, since he, erring due to arrogance had cursed him. Seeing lord Viṣṇu at the time of the daily worship, they told him like that. They solicited Lakṣmī’s lord for rendering the curse ineffective. “O god, how shall we, your devotees, go to the stock of a crocodile and an elephant? O ocean of kindness, turn away that curse.”

## *The lord* *said*:

15-29. The words of my devotees shall never be untrue. I too can never change it. Formerly due to Prahlāda’s words I appeared in a pillar. In the same way due to Ambarīṣa’s words I arose on the way(?). Therefore, having certainly undergone these two curses pronounced by yourselves, obtain my eternal position.

Speaking like this, Viṣṇu vanished.

## *The* *two attendants said*:

Then the crocodile and the elephant were (born) on the bank of Gaṇḍakī. Even in that state they remembered their (former) birth, and observed Viṣṇu-vow. Some time in Kārtika the elephant went to Gaṇḍakī to bathe. Just then, the crocodile remembering the cause of the curse seized him. The elephant seized by the crocodile remembered Viṣṇu. Just then Viṣṇu, holding a conch, a disc, a mace appeared (there). Then the lord, throwing his disc, emancipated the crocodile and the elephant, and absorbing them into himself, took them to Vaikuṇṭha. Since then the place is known as Harikṣetra, where even (now) the stones bear the mark of the disc. Those two, O brāhmaṇa, known as Jaya and Vijaya, and dear to Viṣṇu, are his doorkeepers. Therefore, you too, O you who know piety, always observing Viṣṇu’s vow and having given up jealousy and hypocrisy, view all equally. Always bathe in the morning (when the Sun is) in (the signs of) Libra, Capricornus and Aries, and maintaining a Tulasī-grove observe the Ekādaśī-vow. Always worship brāhmaṇas, cows, and Viṣṇu’s devotees. Do not eat masūra (pulse), gruel made from fermentation of boiled rice and egg-plants. O Dharmadatta, by devotion to him (i.e. Viṣṇu) you too, on your death obtain that highest position of Viṣṇu, as we (have obtained). Sacrifices, gifts and (visits to holy places) are not superior to your vow (commenced) from birth and pleasing Viṣṇu. O best brāhmaṇa, you are lucky that you have observed this vow which gratifies the lord of the world, having got the fruit of which this meritorious one is taken by us to the world of Viṣṇu.

## *Nārada said*:

30-32. Having thus instructed that Dharmadatta, the two, getting into the aeroplane, went with Kalahā. to Viṣṇu’s abode. Dharmadatta also, being convinced, observed the vow and on his death went, accompanied by his two wives, to that place of the lord. One who duly listens to his account which took place in ancient times, his mind, by the favour of the lord of the world, becomes disposed to reach Viṣṇu’s proximity.


