+++
title = "111 The Greatness of Kṛṣṇā and Veṇī"

+++
 

## *Pṛthu said*:

1-2. You told (me) that formerly Kalahā came out of the body of the merchant on the bank (of the confluence) of Kṛṣṇā and Veṇī (and went) with the attendants of Śiva and Viṣṇu. (Now) O you who know Dharma, tell me about the greatness of the two rivers and that place. I have a curiosity about it.

## *Nārada said*:

3-8a. Kṛṣṇā is actually the dark-bodied one, and Veṇī is god Śiva. (Even) the Four-faced (Brahmā) is notable to describe the greatness of their confluence. Yet, I shall tell you about their origin. Listen to it. Formerly in the age of Cākṣuṣa Manu, Manu’s grandfather (i.e. Brahma) was ready to perform a sacrifice on the charming peak of the Sahya mountain. Surrounded by hosts of all gods, and with Viṣṇu and Śiva, he after making the preparation for the sacrifice, went to the peak of that mountain. At the time (sacred to) god Brahmā (i.e. the early part of the day) the hosts of sages like Bhṛgu gathered there to initiate him. Then, through the brāhmaṇas Viṣṇu called the elder wife Svarā. When she was coming slowly, Bhṛgu said to Viṣṇu:

## *Bhṛgu said*:

8b-9a. O Viṣṇu, you called Svarā; but she is not coming quickly. This is the transgression of the auspicious moment. How can the rite of initiation be done?

## *Viṣṇu said*:

9b-10a. If Svarā is not coming quickly, then put Gāyatrī here (i.e. in her place). Can this wife of him also not join him in the meritorious deed?

## *Nārada said*:

10b-13. Rudra also, in the same way, approved of Viṣṇu’s words. That Bhṛgu, hearing those words, seated Gāyatrī to the right of Brahmā, and performed the rite of initiation. O king, while they were duly performing the rite of initiation of Brahmā, Svarā came to the place of the sacrifice. Seeing Gāyatrī initiated with Brahmā, Svarā due to jealousy for her co-wife, angrily said (these) words:

## *Svarā said*:

14-16. (When) those that do not deserve to be honoured, are honoured, and those that deserve to be honoured are ignored, three (inauspicious things) take place there: famine, death, fear. You have seated this younger one on my seat. Therefore, all of you, being devoid of consciousness will have various forms. Since she has sat on my seat, on the right (of Brahmā), therefore let her have a body of a river invisible to the people.

## *Nārada said*:

17-18. Then hearing that curse, Gāyatrī trembled; and getting up, she, though restrained by gods, cursed that Svarā. “As Brahmā is your husband, so he is also mine. You have in vain cursed me. You too (will) become a river.”

## *Nārada said*:

19\. Then all gods led by Śiva and Viṣṇu felt grief; saluting (by prostrating) like a staff on the ground, they requested Svarā:

## *The gods said*:

20-21. O goddess, since you have cursed all of us like Brahmā, if we all become devoid of consciousness and turn into rivers, then these three worlds will certainly perish. You have acted imprudently. Therefore, withdraw this curse.

## *Svarā said*:

22-24. O best gods, since at the commencement of the sacrifice you did not worship the lord of the attendants (i.e. Gaṇeśa), therefore this obstacle, due to my anger, has indeed come up. Nor again, these words of me will be untrue. Therefore, with your portions dulled, turn into rivers. We, the two co-wives, shall become two rivers, flowing into the west, by means of our portions, O gods.

## *Nārada said:*

25-31. O king, then hearing her words Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva became dulled and turned into rivers just by means of their portions. Viṣṇu became Kṛṣṇā, and god Śiva Veṇī. Brahma then separately became Gaṅgā having humps (of waves). The wise gods also, having dulled their portions, became good rivers separately (flowing) from the peaks of Sahya mountain. The best rivers, (formed) with the portions of gods, flowed into the east. Gāyatrī and Svarā joined together, flowing westward, came to be called Sāvitrī. Both Viṣṇu and Śiva appointed at that sacrifice, became (known) by the names Mahābala and Atibala. O king, I am not able to describe the greatness of the two rivers. Gods like Brahmā went (from the place) and remain, through their portions, as rivers. Every act of him who listens with devotion to this great (account of) Kṛṣṇā, removing sins or causes (others) to hear it, would become meritorious, and gets the fruit due to seeing her and bathing in her (water).


