+++
title = "119 In Praise of a Fast for a Month"

+++
 

## *The lord said*:

1-3. O best of Viṣṇu’s devotees, listen to the importance of the (daily) bath in Māgha. O you very intelligent one, there is no (other) devotee of Viṣṇu like you in this world. A man gets that fruit by a (daily) bath in Māgha, which he gets on seeing Viṣṇu at Cakratīrtha or Mathura. He who, with his senses conquered, with his mind tranquil, and endowed with moral conduct, bathes (everyday) in Māgha, does not again come to this mundane existence.

## *Śrī Kṛṣṇa said*:

4\. To you I shall tell about the greatness of (the holy place called) Śūkara, by merely knowing which (a man would) always have my proximity.

## *Sūta said*:

5\. Saying so, lord Kṛṣṇa spoke to Satyā in many ways. I shall tell it (to you). O you (sages) having penance as your treasure; listen to it.

## *Śrī Kṛṣṇa said*:

6-13. A being, even a donkey, that lives in Viṣṇu’s temple at Śūkara extended over five yojanas, becomes the Four-armed (Viṣṇu). The measure of Śūkara is laid down to be three thousand cubits, three hundred cubits and three. O goddess, a man gets that fruit in half a watch (i.e. three hours), (which he would get when) he practises penance for sixty thousand years at another place. The (same) fruit is said (to be obtained) by tulāpuruṣa dāna[^1] in Kurukṣetra when the Sun is seized by Rāhu. It is said to be tenfold in Kāśī, and would be hundredfold in Veṇī, and said to be thousandfold at the confluence of Gaṅgā and the ocean. It is said to be endless in Viṣṇu’s temple at Śūkara. A man gives duly a lakh (of gifts) at another place. (The fruit) would be similar by giving one only at Śūkara. By bathing but once at Śūkara, in Veṇī, and at the confluence of Gaṅgā and the ocean, a man removes (the sin of) the murder of a brāhmaṇa. Alarka formerly got (the kingdom of) the earth with the seven islands after hearing the greatness of Śūkara, O Kārtikeya. (O son, go there on the Dvādaśī of the bright half of Mārgaśīrṣa.)

[^1]:  Tulāpuruṣa—Gift to a brāhmaṇa of as much gold or silver as equals the weight of one’s body.

## *Kārtikeya said*:

14-16. O lord, I desire to listen to (the description of) the best of vows; so also the proper manner and the fruit of a fast for a month. (So also I desire to hear) how it should be observed by men, what would be (the way of) observing the vow, (how) it is duly commenced and duly completed. O Maheśvara, tell me in detail how many times this vow, giving happiness and wealth, is to be observed, O sinless one.

## *Śrī Rudra said*:

17-29. O Kārtikeya, since you have asked all this with devotion, listen to me explaining it, O best among the intelligent. As Viṣṇu is the greatest of the gods, as the Sun is the greatest of the luminaries, as Meru is (the greatest) of the mountains, as Garuḍa is the greatest among the birds, as Gaṅgā is (the greatest) of the holy places, as vaiśya is (the greatest) of the subjects, similarly observing the fast for a month is the greatest among the vows. He who observes the fast for a month would obtain the religious merit due to all vows, all holy places and gifts. A man does not get that religious merit by means of various sacrifices like Agniṣṭoma in which many presents are given as he gets by observing the fast for a month. That man who observes the fast for a month according to the rule has (indeed) muttered (hymns), has offered oblations (into fire), has given (gifts), has observed penance, has made oblations to his dead ancestors. Dedicating a sacrifice to me, Viṣṇu, and worshipping me, and then receiving an order from his preceptor he should observe the fast for a month. Having observed all vows(in honour) of Viṣṇu and observed the auspicious (vow)ofDvādaśī etc. he should observe the fast for a month. O brāhmaṇa, after having observed the vows like Atikṛcchra, Pārāka,[^2] and Cāndrāyaṇa he should fast for a month by the order of his preceptor. Having observed a fast on the Ekādaśī of the bright half of Āśvina, he should take up this vow for thirty days. A man who worships Viṣṇu and fasts for the entire month of Kārtika would enjoy the fruit in the form of salvation. In the temple of Viṣṇu he should three times a day devoutly worship Viṣṇu with the fragrant flowers of mālatī (jasmine), blue lotuses, arka flowers, lotuses, (other) flowers, uśīra-roots, camphor etc. and with the offerings of eatables, cakes, lights etc. after smearing (the lord’s image) with excellent sandal.

[^2]:  Pārāka—Name of a vow of religious penance said to consist in fasting for twelve days and nights, keeping the mind attentive and organs subdued.

30-43. A man, a woman or a widow, having great devotion and with his/her senses conquered, should worship the Garuḍa-bannered god (Viṣṇu) with mind, deeds and words and should day and night utter the names of Viṣṇu. He should devoutly and without false words utter Viṣṇu’s praise. Full of compassion for all beings, of a tranquil temperament, harmless, sleeping and sitting on a seat outside he should narrate (the praise of) Viṣṇu. He should avoid recollection, sight, enjoying fragrant articles and talking of food, and should give up (taking) morsels. He should avoid smearing his body with oil, smearing his head with oil, (chewing) tāmbūla, smearing his body when he is observing the vow, and should avoid everything that is prohibited. While observing the vow he should not touch anything and should not disturb anyone doing a deed. A householder, remaining in a temple, should certainly observe the vow. A man, a good woman or a widow, having duly observed the fast for a month, should worship Viṣṇu properly. With his mind controlled and senses conquered, he should observe this vow without anything wanting or adding for thirty days and should observe the fast for a month, and then on the Dvādaśī (day) he should worship the auspicious Garuḍa-bannered (god). He should worship him with garlands of flowers, sandal, incense, and by besmearing (his image). A man should please Viṣṇu with clothes, ornaments and (by playing upon) musical instruments. With water (from) holy (places mixed) with sandal he should devoutly bathe (the image of) Viṣṇu. He should (worship) the image besmeared with sandal and adorned with incense and flowers. Having fed best brāhmaṇas (and pleased them) with gifts of garments etc. he should give them dakṣiṇā (i.e. presents), and saluting them he should apologise to them. Having thus fasted for a month, and having worshipped Viṣṇu, and having fed the brāhmaṇas, he is honoured in Viṣṇu’s heaven. Thus he should engage thirteen brāhmaṇas. Listen to the manner in which he should dismiss them at the end of the fast for a month. Fasting on the Ekādaśī day he should perform a sacrifice (in honour) of Viṣṇu.

44-53. Having with the permission of his preceptor worshipped the lord of gods, he should, according to his capacity, worship the preceptor. Then saluting the brāhmaṇas of a pure family and character and devoted to Viṣṇu’s worship, he should feed them. Then he should honour them all. Having fed thirteen brāhmaṇas, he should salute and honour the best brāhmaṇas with tāmbūla, pairs of garments, food coverings, yogapaṭṭas, threads, sacred threads, and then he should get fashioned a bed furnished with a cover, well-covered, beautiful, excellent, with pillows and decorated. Then, having according to his capacity got fashioned his golden image, he should put it on the bed after worshipping it with garlands etc. On the bed he should put a seat, wooden sandals, an umbrella, a pair of garments and shoes, and pure flowers. Having thus made the bed, and having saluted those brāhmaṇas, he should request the brāhmaṇas for their consent and say: “I am going to Viṣṇu’s world.” Then the best man would go to Viṣṇu’s healthy abode. He should repeatedly say to the brāhmaṇas seated in the pavilion: “O best brāhmaṇas, may all that is without the (proper) hymns and (proper) acts, be fully accomplished due to the favour of your words.” I have (thus) properly told (you) the manner of (observing) the vow of the fast for a month.




