+++
title = "123 Instructions Concerning the Fast"

+++
 

## *Kārtikeya said*:

1-3. O lord, I wish to listen to the vow which is best among the vows; so also the mode of observing the fast for a month and the fruit of it as is told; and also how the vow is to be commenced, and how it is to be duly completed. O lord, tell me in detail the number (of days) for which this vow is to be observed, O best of the gods.

## *Śrī Rudra said*:

4-17. Well, O kārtikeya, hear from me who am telling you, all that you have devoutly asked, O best among the intelligent. As Viṣṇu is among gods, as the Sun is among the shining ones, as Meru is among mountains, and Garuḍa among birds, as Gaṅgā is among holy places, as the trader is among the subjects, so is this fast for a month the best of all vows. He who observes the fast for a month would obtain the merit of all vows, and all holy places, and the fruit due to all gifts. A man does obtain that merit by means of sacrifices like Agniṣṭoma (performed) with profuse gifts, which he obtains by fasting for a month. A man who duly observes the fast for a month, has (indeed) muttered (hymns), has offered oblations into fire, has given (gifts), has practised penance, and performed svadhā (i.e. pleased his dead ancestors by offering them oblations). Dedicating a sacrifice to Viṣṇu, and having worshipped him, and having secured his preceptor’s order, he should fast for a month. Having observed all the auspicious vows as prescribed for the devotee of Viṣṇu, such as Dvādaśī, he should then observe the fast for a month. Having observed Atikṛcchra, Pārāka and Cāndrāyaṇa (vows) he, considering his physical strength and weakness, should observe the fast for a month. An anchorite or an ascetic or a widow should observe the fast for a month with the preceptor’s—brāhmaṇa’s—order. Having bathed and fasted on the eleventh of Āśvina, he should take up this vow for thirty days. That man who, worshipping Viṣṇu, would fast for the entire month of Kārtika, would enjoy the fruit of salvation. In the temple of Viṣṇu he should devoutly worship Viṣṇu three times (a day) with jasmine flowers, blue lotuses, lilies and lotuses, camphor and besmearing (the image) with saffron, sandal, and excellent sandal, (should worship him) with offerings of eatables, incense and lights.

18-29. A man, a woman or a widow, having great devotion and with his senses conquered, should worship the Garuḍa-bannered (god Viṣṇu) with mind, deeds and words, and should day and night utter the names of Viṣṇu. He should devoutly and without false words utter Viṣṇu’s praise. Full of compassion for all beings, of a tranquil temperament, harmless, sleeping and sitting on a seat outside, he should narrate (the praise of) Viṣṇu. He should avoid thinking, seeing, enjoying fragrant articles, and talking of food, and should give up (taking) morsels. He should avoid smearing his body with oil, smearing his head with oil, (chewing) tāmbūla, smearing his body when he is observing the vow, and should avoid everything that is prohibited. While observing the vow he should not touch anything and should not disturb anyone doing a deed. A householder, remaining in a temple, should certainly observe the vow. A man, a good woman or a widow, having duly observed the fast for a month, should worship Viṣṇu properly. With his mind controlled and senses conquerred, he should observe this vow without anything wanting or additional for thirty days, and should observe the fast for a month, and then on the Dvādaśī (day) he should worship the auspicious Garuḍa-bannered (god). He should worship him with garlands of flowers, sandal, incense, and by besmearing (his image). A man should please Viṣṇu with clothes, ornaments, and (by playing upon) musical instruments. With water from holy places and mixed with sandal he should devoutly bath the image of Viṣṇu. He should (worship) the image besmeared with sandal, and adorneed with incense and flowers. Having fed best brāhmaṇas and pleased them with dakṣiṇā (i.e. presents), and saluting them he should apologise to them. Having apologised to the brāhmaṇas, he should dismiss them after having honoured and worshipped them.

30-42. In this way having observed the fast for a month and worshipped Viṣṇu according to his monetary capacity, with devotion, and having fed the brāhmaṇas according to his capacity he is honoured in the heaven of Viṣṇu. Now listen to the manner in which at the end of the fast for a month, having chosen thirteen brāhmaṇas, he should dismiss them. Observing a fast on the Ekādaśī day, he should perform a sacrifice (in honour) of Viṣṇu. Having, with the consent of his preceptor, worshipped the lord of gods, and having, according to his capacity, honoured his preceptor, he should salute his preceptor. Then he should feed after saluting the brāhmaṇas of a pure character and family and greatly devoted to worshipping Viṣṇu. Then having worshipped and fed all the brāhmaṇas and having given the best brāhmaṇas tāmbūlas, pairs of garments, food and coverings, so also yogapaṭṭas (i.e. cloths thrown over the back and knees of ascetics during abstract meditation), threads and sacred threads and then having saluted them, he should devoutly honour them. He should prepare a bed furnished with a cover, well-covered, beautiful, excellent, with pillows and decorated. Then, having according to his capacity, got fashioned his (i.e. Viṣṇu’s) golden image, he should put it on the bed after worshipping it with garlands etc. On the bed he should put a seat, wooden sandals, an umbrella, a pair of garments and shoes, and pure flowers. Having thus made the bed, and having saluted those brāhmaṇas, he should request the brāhmaṇas for their consent and say: “I am going to Viṣṇu’s world.” Then the best man would go to Viṣṇu’s healthy abode. He should repeatedly say to the brāhmaṇas seated in the pavilion: “O best brāhmaṇas, may all that is without the (proper) hymns and (proper) acts, be fully accomplished due to the favour of your words.” I have (thus) properly told (you) the manner of (observing) the vow of the fast for a month.


