+++
title = "124 Haribodhinī, Bhīṣmapañcaka etc."

+++
 

## *The lord said*:

1-15. O best god, also listen to the greatness of Prabodhinī which destroys sins, enhances merit, and gives salvation to those who comprehend the truth. O Kārtikeya, Gaṅgā Bhāgīrathī roars on the earth till the time the Haribodhinī (Ekādaśī) in Kārtika has not come. The holy places and the lakes up to the ocean roar till the time the Prabodhinī (Ekādaśī) in Kārtika has not arrived. Thousands of horse sacrifices and hundreds of Rājasūya sacrifices are equal to one fast on the Prabodhinī (Ekādaśī). O brāhmaṇa, Prabodhinī gives even that which is desired but which is difficult to be got or reached in the three worlds with the mobile and the immobile. O brāhmaṇa, Haribodhinī when fasted on, easily gives affluence, union, knowledge, kingdom, happiness and wealth. Just by means of one fast Haribodhinī burns the sins resembling Meru and Mandara committed (by a man). O best among men, he who naturally observes a fast on the Prabodhinī (day), according to the rule, gets the fruit as is told (in the sacred texts). The sin committed during thousands of former existences is burnt like a heap of cotton by keeping awake on the Prabodhinī (day). O Kārtikeya, listen; I shall tell you the characteristic(s) of the vigil, by merely knowing which Viṣṇu is not difficult to be secured. O noble one, a man should sing, play upon musical instruments, recite the Purāṇas, offer incense, light, eatables, flowers, besmear (the image) with sandal, offer fruits, respectful offerings, have faith, give gifts, control his senses, be truthful, without sleep, full of joy and (religious) acts, (offer worship) with energy and without laziness etc. by going round (the image), and preceded by obeisance, so also accompanied by waving of lights. With a mind free from dejection he should wave lights before Viṣṇu in every watch. He who, with a concentrated mind, keeps vigil accompanied with these characteristics, and without dishonesty regarding money, for the lord, is not reborn on the earth.

16-26. He who thus devoutly and without deceitfulness keeps awake on the day of (i.e. sacred to) Viṣṇu, is taken to the highest position. He who, everyday in Kārtika, worships Viṣṇu with the recital of the Puruṣa-sūkta (hymn) has worshipped Viṣṇu for thousands of crores of years. The man who would everyday worship Viṣṇu in Kārtika according to the prescribed manner for five days, would enjoy salvation. He who would worship Viṣṇu (saying) ‘Salutation to Nārāyaṇa’, is free from torments in hell and goes to an auspicious position. He who recites in Kārtika (the hymn containing) the thousand names of Viṣṇu, and (the account of) the release of the lord of elephants, does not have rebirth. He who keeps awake on the Dvādaśī in the month of Kārtika lives in heaven for thousands of crores of yugas and hundreds of Manu’s periods. And hundreds and thousands (persons) born in his family obtain Viṣṇu’s position. Therefore, one should keep awake. O beautiful lady, he who eulogises and sings (songs about Viṣṇu) in the last watch (of a day) in Kārtika, lives in Śvetadvīpa with his dead ancestors. He who offers eatables to Viṣṇu at the end of a day in Kārtika lives for so many yugas in heaven, O best sages. O best sage, he who would continuously worship the lord of gods with jasmine flowers and lotus, goes to the highest position. A man who observes (fast on) the Ekādaśī of the bright half of Kārtika, and gives auspicious pitchers (to brāhmaṇas) in the morning, goes to my abode.

## *Kārtikeya said*:

27-28. O lord, tell me about the virtuous vow, best among the vows, viz. Bhīṣmapañcaka to be observed in the month of Kārtika. Through favour to me and the sages, tell me, O grand-sire, about the manner in which it is observed, and its fruit, O best god.

## *The lord said*:

29-45. O you best among the believers in vows, I shall explain to you the very meritorious vow which lasts for five days. Since Bhīṣma got it from Viṣṇu, it is called Bhīṣmapañcaka. Who, except Viṣṇu, is able to tell the merits of this vow? Listen to the ancient practice. In the bright half of Kārtika it was observed by Vasiṣṭha, Bhṛgu, Garga etc. in the ages like Kṛta. In the yugas like Tretā it was observed by Ambarīṣa with (offerings of) food etc. and by brāhmaṇas observing celibacy, muttering hymns and performing rites like sacrifices. So also (it was observed) by kṣatriyas and vaiśyas highly devoted to truth and purity. It is difficult to be observed by those who are void of truth (i.e. are not truthful) and cannot be observed by those of foolish hearts. They say it is difficult to be observed, (that is, it is) ‘Bhīṣma’. It cannot be observed by ordinary men. O best brāhmaṇa, he who observes it, has (indeed) observed every (vow). This Bhīṣmapañcaka vow gives great merit, destroys great sins. Therefore, men should carefully observe it. Having properly and according to the precept bathed on the Ekādaśī in the bright half of Kārtika one should take up this vow lasting for five days. The observer of the vow should especially bathe in the morning and at mid-day in a river or a spring, and having obtained cowdung with rice and barley he should in due course gratify his dead ancestors. One of a strong vow, having bathed and observed silence, and having put on washed garments, should carefully offer water and make respectful offering to Bhīṣma. He should carefully worship Bhīṣma and give gifts. He should carefully and especially give five jewels to a brāhmaṇa. Lord Viṣṇu with Lakṣmī should also be always worshipped. By means of worshipping (Viṣṇu) during the group of five (days) Viṣṇu is pleased for crores of kalpas. Whatever (image etc.) is made, he should fashion it with five metals. By giving water and making a respectful offering, a man gets the entire fruit of vows (lasting) for a year. One who makes (the offering) with (the recital of) this hymn: ‘I am offering this water to Bhīṣma who has Vaiyā-ghrapāda gotra and Sāṃkṛta pravara’ would enjoy salvation. ‘I make the respectful offering to Bhīṣma, the incarnation of the Vasus, the son of Śantanu, and a life-long celibate.’ This is the hymn of the respectful offering.

46-56. He, who, in this way, finishes the group of five (days), undoubtedly gets religious merit equal to that of a horse sacrifice. For five days he should carefully observe restraint. O son, the practice of a vow is not possible without restraint. Viṣṇu gave (the highest position) to Bhīṣma who departed in the Uttarāyaṇa; he became[^1].... Then he should get Viṣṇu, the destroyer of all sins. Then he should devoutly bathe (the image) with water, honey, milk and ghee; so also with the five products of a cow and water mixed with sandal. Then he should besmear (the image of) Viṣṇu, the Garuḍa-bannered (god) with fragrant sandal, with saffron, and with camphor mixed with uśīra (sandal). He should worship (the image) with charming flowers along with black aloewood and incense. He, with devotion, should burn guggulu (a fragrant gum resin) with ghee before (the image of) Kṛṣṇa. During the five days he should offer light day and night. He should offer excellent food as offering of eatables. Having thus worshipped, remembered and saluted the god, he should mutter one hundred and eight times the hymn *Namo Vāsudevāya*. He should make an offering with sesamum, rice and barley smeared with ghee, with the utterance of the hymn of six syllables, along with the utterance of the exclamation *svāhā*. The observer of the vow, having offered the evening sandhyā prayer, having saluted Viṣṇu, having muttered the hymn as before, should sleep on the (bare) ground.

[^1]:  This part is unintelligible (Tr.)

57-69. All this should be done for five days. Listen to the speciality of and that which is superior in this vow. On the first day the observer of the vow should worship Viṣṇu’s feet with lotuses. On the second (day) he should worship his knees with bilva-leaves. Then, with his mind directed to him, he should devoutly worship the head of the Disc-holder, the god of gods, with jasmine flowers on the full-moon day of Kārtika. Having succinctly worshipped Viṣṇu on the Ekādaśī, he, after having eaten cowdung, should duly observe fast on the Ekādaśī day. The observer of the vow should drink cow’s urine on the Dvādaśī, milk on the Trayodaśī and curd on the Caturdaśī with (the recital of) the hymn. Having eaten (and drunk these) for the purification of his body and having fasted for four days, he should, after bathing, worship Viṣṇu according to the sacred precept. Giving up sinful thoughts the intelligent one, observing celibacy, should devoutly feed brāhmaṇas, and give presents to them. The man, avoiding liquor and flesh, so also sinful coitus, subsisting on vegetables and sages’ foods, should be deeply engaged in worshipping Kṛṣṇā. Then having first (sipped) the five products of the cow, he should eat at night. He would obtain the fruit of the vow thus duly concluded. (Even) a drunkard who would drink liquor from birth to death obtains the highest position by observing this Bhīṣma-vow. By the words (i.e. order) of a brāhmaṇa, women should observe it, which enchances religious merit. Widows also should observe it for salvation, and an increase in their happiness. O Kārtikeya, men observe the Kārtika(vow) by bathing everyday and (giving) gifts for abundance of (the fulfilment of) all desires and for (obtaining) religious merit. O child, greatly engrossed in meditation upon Viṣṇu, they should also perform the Vaiśvadeva sacrifice (in honour of all deities), which gives health and sons and destroys great sins.

70-78. O Kārtikeya, with all efforts he should observe the Kārtika (vow) at holy places. The conclusion of all the vows (observed) during the year is observed in Kārtika. An image of Sin should be fashioned. It should have fearful clothes and should be very fierce. It should have a sword in its hand; it should have come out(i.e. should be prominent); it should have iron fangs and be dreadful. Covered with a black piece of cloth it should be put on a prastha (i.e. a particular measure) of sesamum seeds. Its wreath should be made ofred flowers; its golden earrings should be bright. Having, with great devotion, worshipped it with (the utterance of) the names of Dharmarāja, he taking a handful of flowers, should recite this hymn: ‘Due to the grace of your feet may the sin committed in another (i.e. previous) existence or in this, perish.’ Having duly worshipped that golden image, and having, according to his capacity honoured the brāhmaṇas, expounders of the Vedas, he should, to please Kṛṣṇa, god of gods, of unimpaired acts, give it to a brāhmaṇa (saying) ‘May Dharma be pleased with me.’ According to his capacity he should give presents to the reader (of the next). Saying, ‘May Kṛṣṇa be pleased with me’, he should give gold and cows also. Having done his deeds, and being detached, he should be controlled. According to his capacity he should give excellente gifts to others also.

79-83. (Such) a man, of a tranquil mind, and guiltless, would obtain the highest position. He should reflect upon Mahādeva who is dark green like the petal of a blue lotus, who has four fangs and four arms, who has eight feet, and one eye, who is spike-eared and has a rough voice, who is cold, who has two tongues, whose eyes are red, who has a lion-like thin cover. He has no form. Bhīṣma, being on the bed of arrows told this to me. This vow known as Bhīṣmapañcaka on the earth, is confined to five days beginning with Ekādaśī. There is no prohibition for him who is intent on taking food. Due to that vow Viṣṇu gives an auspicious fruit.

## *Sūta said*:

84-88. This has more religious merit than all (other) vows. It is difficult to be done on the earth. This secret, the collection of the essences of the sacred texts, is told by me. It is a secret of the gods. It is a great secret. It at once gives salvation even to those who are engaged in illicit intercourse. It would free one from both the sins of selling one’s daughter or one’s sister. This sacred text leading to salvation should not be revealed to other people. A man hearing it at once goes to salvation. It should be carefully preserved. This auspicious (vow) is not to be told to them who give it up. This is the truth and the (only) truth, O Kārtikeya. Thus all the fruit that Kārtika has is told.

## *Śrī Viṣṇu said*:

89-96. The god of gods told it to his son for his welfare. Hearing those words of his father, Kārtikeya was full of joy. All those, with the palms of their hands joined, said to the god, the life of the world: “We are blessed by hearing the fruit due to Kārtika. Nothing else is to be heard. I have obtained the fruit of my existence.” That man who, having heard (this description of) the greatness (of the vow), would honour the reader (of it) with (the grant of a piece of) land, gold, garments, is equal to Viṣṇu, since when the reader is honoured, Viṣṇu is worshipped. Like that he should always give to the reader if he desires the auspicious religious texts, Purāṇa, or Vedic texts, etc. to be fruitful. One who desires religious merit should give the book to the reader only. Those who give the Purāṇic texts, enjoy inexhaustible fruits. He who would devoutly read this, or would retain it after having heard it, is freed from all sins, and goes to Viṣṇu’s heaven. There is no doubt that merely by listening to the (account of this) importance, he gets wealth, grains, fame. sons, (long) life, and good health.



