+++
title = "130 Kinds of Devotion to Viṣṇu"

+++
 

## *Pārvatī said*:

1-2. O lord, I have heard about the greatness of Kārtika, so also of Māgha. Now I desire to hear about the best act, giving salvation. O mighty lord of the universe, tell me what is called the best devotion, by merely knowing which men would obtain happiness.

## *Mahādeva said*:

3-19. A man should have his heart merged in Him. That devotion is said to be the greatest. He should also be given to practising compassion. He should always be intent upon duties sacred to Viṣṇu. He should subsist on fruits, roots and water. He should have the marks of a conch, a disc (on his body). He should worship Viṣṇu three times a said. That is supposed to be virtuous devotion. Virtuous (*sāttvikī*) devotion is said to be the best. The passionate (*rājasī*) one is said to be intermediate. The vicious (*tāmasī*) one is said to be the lowest. (Thus) devotion is said to be of three kinds. Those who desire the fruit of salvation should have (devotion) for Viṣṇu. That devotion which people have through egotism, hypocrisy or deceit is declared to be vicious. So also that devotion for the god which is had for the destruction of another (person), or with hypocrisy in mind, is declared to be vicious. That separate (i.e. another type of) devotion in which a man would worship me at the beginning of an act of worship with the aim of (getting) objects of senses, glory or affluence is passionate. Brāhmaṇas intent on knowledge should practise virtuous devotion which is said to consist in the sense of dedicating oneself to Viṣṇu. Therefore, O goddess, Viṣṇu is always to be served. Vice is earned through vicious devotion, passion through passionate (devotion), and through virtuous (devotion) virtue is secured. A brāhmaṇa engaged in Vedic studies, wealthy, free from attachment and hatred, having (the marks of) a conch and a disc (on his person) is always said to be pure. He who is engaged in ceremonial acts and sacrificial rites, who always censures Viṣṇu and his devotees is said to be a great cāṇḍāla. O chief goddess, those who are always engaged in Vedic studies, who are always acting as priests at sacrifices, who are always engaged in maintaining the holy fire, who are averse to Vaiṣṇava religion, are out of (the fold of) the Vedas. The wise, being pleased cause tranquillity in those men, the grandsire etc. bring, about happiness, and the best sages give well-being to those men who have devotion for Viṣṇu. Auspicious Planets and evil spirits and goblins, hosts of gods like Brahmā are pleased, and Lakṣmī is steady in the houses of those men who have devotion for Viṣṇu. Holy places like Gaṅgā, Gayā, Naimiṣa, Puṣkara, Kāśī, Prayāga, Kuru, Jāṅgala, live devoutly in the bodies of those men who have devotion for Viṣṇu. Thus a wise man should everyday worship the lord with Lakṣmī; and should thus be blessed everyday. He is undoubtedly a brāhmaṇa. The man—a kṣatriya, a vaiśya or a śūdra—devoted especially to the best god, goes to (i.e. secures) salvation.


