+++
title = "133 The Holy Places in Jambūdvipa"

+++
 

## *Pārvatī said*:

1\. O you of a good vow, tell me about the holy places that exist on this island. This island is fashioned by the lord as the king of all islands. O lord, favouring me, tell me about them with (i.e. counting) their number.

## *Mahādeva said*:

2-12. The Omnipresent (lord) should be seen in all beings on the earth. Whatever primary substance, with the mobile and the immobile, is seen in the seven worlds, is not seen or heard by me to be without him. Therefore, the great god Viṣṇu, Keśava, who removes affliction, would live in the form of a holy place on this island, O chief goddess. I shall certainly tell you about all the holy places. First is the holy place (called) Puṣkara, auspicious and best among the holy places. Second holy place is Vārāṇasī, giving salvation. Third sacred spot is Naimiṣa, said to be purifying by the sages. Fourth is Prayāga, said to be the best among the holy places. Fifth is said to be Kārmuka that has sprung up on Gandhamādana. Sixth is the holy place called Mānasa, pleasing to the gods. Seventh is Viśvakāya on the auspicious Avara mountain. Eighth is called Gautama, formerly fashioned on Mandara. Ninth is Madotkata; tenth is Caitrarathaka. Eleventh is Kānyakubja where Vāmana (i.e. Viṣṇu) dwells. Twelfth is Malaya; then there is Kubjāmraka. (Then there are) Viśveśvara, Girikarṇa, Kedāra, giving a good position (i.e. leading to salvation). Bāhya is on the surface of Himālaya; similariy there is Gopaka on Gokarṇa. On the Himālaya is Sthāneśvara; and Bilvapatrika on Bilvaka. The holy place Mādhava is on Śrīśaila; and Bhadra is on Bhadreśvara. Vijaya is said to be on Vārāha, and Vaiṣṇava on Vaiṣṇava mountain. On Rudrakoṭa is Raudra; and on the Kāliñjara mountain is Paitrya. The holy place Kampila is on Kampila. and Karkoṭaka on Mukuṭa.

13-30. O Chief goddess, the place holy due to Śālagrāma is on the bank of the Gallikā. On (the bank of) Narmadā is one called Śiva, and on (the bank of) Māyā is Viśvarūpaka. On the Raivata mountain have come up (the holy places, namely) Utpalākṣa, Sahasrākṣa. On (the bank of) Gaṅgā is Pitṛtīrtha, so also is Viṣṇupādodbhava. On (the bank of) Vipāśā is Vipāpā, and Puṇḍravardhana is at Pāṭala. Nārāyaṇa is on Supārśva, and Viṣṇu temple on Trikūṭa. On Vipula is one named Vipula, and Kalyāṇa is on Malaya mountain. At Koṭitīrtha is Kaurava, and Sugandha is on Gandhamādana. Trisandhyā is at Kubjāmraka, and Haripriya at Gaṅgādvāra. In the region of Vindhya is Śaila, and Sārasvata is said to be on Badari. On (the bank of) the Kālindī is Kalparūpa, and Sāyaka is said to be on Sahya. Cāndra is in Candra region, and Ramaṇa is the chief among the holy places. On (the bank of) Yamunā is (the one) called Mṛga; and Kurūdbhava is on Karavīra. The holy place called Umā is on the Vināyaka mountain. Ārogya is in the Bhāskara country. Maheśvara is at Mahākāla. A holy place is named Abhayada. On Vindhya is one called Amṛta. Viśvarūpa is in Maṇḍapa. In Īśvara city is one called Svāhā. On (the bank of) Pracaṇḍā is Vaigaleya, and Cāṇḍika in Amarakaṇṭaka. At the holy place of Prabhāsa is Someśvara, and there is also Puṣkara. Devamātra is situated on the bank of Pārāvata on Sarasvatī. At Mahāpadma is Mahālaya, and Piṅgaleśvara on (the bank of) Payoṣṇī. So also is a holy place on (the bank of) Siṃhikā, and at Saurava one called Ravi. In the Kṛttikā-region is the holy place Kārtika; and Śaṅkara on mountain Śaṅkara. Similarly at the confluence of Subhadrā and Sindhu is a divine holy place called Utpala. Then there is Gāṇapatya on the mountain called Viṣṇu. Then on Jālandhara is the holy place which is called Viṣṇumukha. At Tāra is one called Tāraka on the mountain called Viṣṇu. Pauṇḍra is in the Devadāruvana, and Pauśka [Pauṣka?] in the Kāśmīra region. The snowy Bhauma is on Himālaya, so also are Catuṣṭika and Pauṣṭika. Similarly the holy place Kapālamocana has come up at Māyāpura. Then is the holy place Śaṅkhoddhāra (of) the god holding the conch. At Piṇḍa is one named Piṇḍa, and Vaikhānasa at Siddha. On (the bank of) Acchoda is Viṣṇukāma, giving religious merit, sensuous enjoyment, worldly prosperity and salvation. On the northern bank is Auṣadhya, and Kuśodaka is at Kuśadvīpa. Manmatha is on Hemakūṭa, and Satyavādana on Kumuda. At the bank of Vadantī is the holy place called Āśvaka, and Mātṛka is said to exist on Vindhya.

31-40. On Citta is the holy place (called) Brahmamaya which is said to be (the most) purifying of all holy places. O beautiful lady, listen to the description of the holy place best of all these. A holy place (like) Viṣṇumaya never existed (before) nor will be there. Merely by uttering (its) name, one who has killed a brāhmaṇa, or snatched gold, or has killed a child or a cow, is freed (from the sin) due to Viṣṇu’s grace. In the Kali age Dvāravatī is charming, and god Viṣṇu is excellent. The salvation of those men who see (the image of) the lord, is certain. O great goddess, I, remaining among the wise, thus think of that blessed lord Viṣṇu, the master of all. These hundred and eight holy places are told here. He who mutters their names or hears them is free from all sins. He who, after bathing in these holy places, sees (the image of) Nārāyaṇa Hari (i.e. Viṣṇu), is freed from all sins and goes to the ancient Viṣṇu, the lord of the world, said to be the holy place purifying the worlds. Those best men who go to (these holy places) go to the highest position (i.e. salvation). One should get this to be heard (i.e. recited) at (the time of) a rite in honour of the dead ancestors. Enjoying pleasures in this world, one goes to the eternal (position) of Viṣṇu. (By reciting these names) at the time of the gift of a cow, or the gift at the time of a śrāddha, or (by reciting it) everyday, or at the rite of worshipping a deity, one attains the highest Brahman.


