+++
title = "136 The Greatness of Nanditīrtha"

+++
 

## *Pārvatī said*:

1\. Tell me which regions that Sābhramatī, having flowed out from Nandikuṇḍa, purified, and which holy places she, crossing the Arbuda mountain, brought about.

## *Sūta said*:

2\. When the goddess spoke this, Śiva, the lord of the universe, spoke (these) words to Pārvatī who fascinated the world.

## *Mahādeva said*:

3-19. The sages first got fashioned the holy place called Kapālamocana, after the very purifying holy place Nandikuṇḍa. The holy place is more lustrous than all (others), and is extremely purifying. Here I had dropped the skull called *Kapāla*. Therefore, O Pārvatī, it became the holy place (called) *Kapālamocana*. It clearly purifies all the beings, and is well-known in the world. That holy place, the lord of holy places, is called Kapālakuṇḍa, at which pure and auspicious holy place the noble ones (like) gods, so also nāgas, gandharvas, and kinnaras etc. live. The holy place is known in the three worlds and gives knowledge and salvation. Having bathed there and having purified oneself, one should fast for a night, worship Kapāleśa and feed brāhmaṇas. Even by giving (a piece of) cloth (to a brāhmaṇa) there, one would get the fruit of an Agnihotra. One who, at that holy place, has resorted to the vow of seeing (the lord), would certainly go to Śiva’s heaven after having cast one’s body. O chief goddess, formerly Saudāsa, on bathing at this holy place, was freed from (the sin of) a brāhmaṇa’s murder, and obtained knowledge. The very powerful Sudāsa was born in the family of Bhagīratha. His son Mitrasaha was also known as Saudāsa. Due to the curse of Vasiṣṭha Saudāsa obtained the body of a demon. After having bathed in Sābhramatī, he became free from the sin due to the curse. Here, at this holy place called Nandi, are always present the pure rivers giving religious merit like Gaṅgā, Yamunā, Godāvarī and Sarasvatī. Learned men should especially make the gift of a cow, land, bed, daughter. A bath in Sābhramatī is said to be like this gift. Here even all the fallen are purified merely by means of the touch of the water. The dead ancestors of the man who, being greatly devoted, performs a śrāddha here, are pleased, and go to the highest position.

Those men who always listen to this divine account, are freed from all sins and would obtain absorption into Viṣṇu. For them who praise Maheśvara by means of their acts, mentally and by words, there is no grief till deluge.


