+++
title = "138 The Greatness of Gaṇatīrtha"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-15. One intent on a pilgrimage to holy places, should then go to Gaṇatīrtha. It is called Triviṣṭapa by Śiva’s attendants and is on the bank of Candanā. A man bathing on the full-moon day at Triviṣṭapa, and being composed, is freed from (the sin of) the murder of a brāhmaṇa. No doubt should be entertained about this. He too, the noble and meritorious one, who stays at Triviṣṭapa during the four months of the rainy season, is also honoured in Rudra’s world. A man, having bathed at Gaṇatīrtha and fasted on the Aṣṭamī (day), and having bathed at the confluence of Bakulā, goes to heaven. A man, having bathed at that holy place and having seen Bakuleśa, would obtain the position of the chief of Śiva’s attendants due to the grace of the lord of Śiva’s attendants. A man hearing (about) this which is pure, very meritorious, increasing religious merit and (span of) life, obtains religious merit equal to (that obtained from) a bath in Gaṅgā. Having stayed here, a man, observing a fast, with his senses controlled and composed, who thus mutters the names of the charming lord of Śiva’s attendants, obtains all pleasures. This is the truth and the (only) truth, O you of a beautiful face. (There was) the powerful king, Viśvadatta, of the lunar dynasty. He practised penance here for a long time, O chief goddess. Then due to Śrī Gaṇeśa’s grace he obtained the position of the chief of Śiva’s attendants. All the meritorious sages like Vasiṣṭha, Vāmadeva, Hoḍa, Kauśītaka, Bharadvāja. Aṅgiras, Viśvāmitra and Vāmana, everyday serve (the lord) due to Gaṇeśa’s grace, O great goddess. A sonless man obtains sons, a poor man gets wealth, an ignorant man obtains knowledge, and a man desiring salvation would obtain salvation. O you beautiful lady, what is the use of repeatedly talking profusely about any other thing? He who would bathe here and offer worship, is freed from all sins, and goes to the highest position of Viṣṇu, (and reaches) Śiva of the form of Viṣṇu, and Viṣṇu of the form of Śiva. Due to Viṣṇu’s grace, O goddess, I do not see any difference (between the two of us).


