+++
title = "140 Hiraṇyāsaṅgama-tīrtha"

+++
 

## *Śrī Mahādeva said*:

1-16. O goddess, I shall tell you about the great confluence of Hiraṇyā (with Sābhramatī). When that Sābhramatī Gaṅgā formerly had seven streams, then she—the daughter of Brahmā—was known as Saptasrotā. The seventh stream is known as Hiraṇyā. A sinful man having bathed at that holy place would obtain heaven. The mountain Satyavān is between Ṛkṣu and Mañjuma. To its east is the auspicious confluence of Hiraṇyā (with Sābhramatī). Having bathed there and drunk (water) one would obtain an auspicious course. Having seen Nārāyaṇa Hari at Vanasthalī, one should then go to Hiraṇyāsaṅgameśvara, a holy place, auspicious for celestial nymphs, where Urvaśī, (the most) beautiful among the celestial nymphs, was formerly born. There Nara and Nārāyaṇa practised excellent penance. At the charming and auspicious confluence of Hiraṇyā (with Sābhramatī), which removes great sins, all sages, with their sins gone, bathe. O goddess, the brāhmaṇas like Vasiṣtha and like Vālakhilya, bathe there at the confluence of Hiraṇyā (with Sābhramatī). By bathing there one’s form certainly becomes golden. A mortal always obtains that fruit (by bathing) at the confluence of Hiraṇyā (with Sābhramatī) which is equal to the fruit of the gift of a thousand cows. And at Hiraṇyāsaṅgama the fruit is said to be infinite times more than the one obtained at the time of lunar or solar eclipse at Daśāśvamedha. Hiraṇyākṣa was a great demon. He practised severe penance (here). His body formerly became like gold there. When king Janamejaya bathed at that place, his (sin due to the) murder of a brāhmaṇa vanished. The royal sage Viśvāmitra came here for a bath. Having especially bathed here he. went to my city. O chief goddess, brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras, who bathe here, go to Śiva’s abode.


