+++
title = "141 Madhurāditya"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-11. O goddess, then I shall, after the description of Hiraṇyāsaṅgama, describe the holy place where the river Dharmavatī joins (Sābhramatī). There is no doubt that a fortunate man bathing there goes to heaven. He who sees there the holy place-fashioned by Yama is meritorious. Those who perform a śrāddha there are free from the debt of their dead ancestors. Then there is the Madhurā-tīrtha, which destroys all sins. One should bathe at Madhurā-tīrtha, and see Viṣṇu, the killer of Madhu. Here, Kṛṣṇa, full of the fear of Jarāsandha, had rested. After the murder of Kaṃsa demon had taken place, he, desirous of going to Kuśasthalī, lived for seven nights on the bank of Candanā, surrounded by Bhoja, Vṛṣṇi, Andhaka and Yādava heroes. He reached Madhurātīrtha and bathed as per rules. There Viṣṇu established (the image) by name Madhurāditya. He settled (there) eighteen thousand brāhmaṇas performing sacrifices, and left after giving them various vehicles. O chief goddess, there are thousands of holy places. One desiring the good of the dead ancestors, should perform a śrāddha there.”You who are staying in my holy place, should never be afraid of Jarasandha.” Having thus told those brāhmaṇas Kṛṣṇa went to Dvārakā. A man having bathed in that holy place, should worship Madhurārka. Due to the gift of a tawny cow on the seventh of the bright fortnight of Māgha, a man after enjoying pleasures here for a long time, would go to the position of the Sun.

12-23. O beautiful lady, listen, I shall tell you an ancient account, hearing which people are free from such sins as the murder of a brāhmaṇa. O goddess, on one occasion, the best sage Māṇḍavya practised very auspicious and severe penance at Gaṅgādvāra. He ate leaves and fruits and always ate (i.e. subsisted on) air. O goddess, day and night he was always greatly devoted to meditating on Viṣṇu. He was engaged in the practice of abstract meditation, and was always given to religious practices. O goddess, king Viśvamohana lived in that country. He had abundant wealth (consisting) of elephants, horses, chariots and foot-soldiers on the earth. His son, of auspicious marks, was Somacandra by name. O goddess, once he went for hunting in the forest. Having gone there, and having had the sports of hunting, he, surrended by his own people, amused himself. When he was engaged in sports, it was night, O goddess. During the night the king stayed in the forest for hunting. When the night passed, and when it was the period (of the day) called Brahma, his horse was stolen by a wicked thief. Then there was a cry, ‘Hā, hā’ ‘Where has the horse gone?’ Then all of them desirous of going away and eager, through the fear of the king, said to one another: “The horse is specially stolen by a thief.” Looking for (it), they all came to Haridvāra. There the sage Māṇḍavya always practised penance. At that time the soldiers saw him lost in meditation: ‘This thief, always a sinner, remains in meditation’.

24-32. Suspecting that he had come (there) after having tied the horse, the king’s soldiers thought like that and seized the great sage They reported to the king about the thief, viz. the best sage. “O king, this snatcher of the horse is brought. O king, he is always a thief.” Then he gave an order to transfix him on a stake. Then all the soldiers came together, and tied him. Then in a moment he was transfixed on a stake. He did not notice that act of being transfixed on a stake. Since he was engaged in abstract meditation and highly devoted to meditation on Viṣṇu, he noticed being transfixed on a stake after some time. “I am Māṇḍavya, the best of sages. Who has done this act?” The revered, omniscient one, who knew (the events of) the three times, thought: ‘This must be the act of Dharma, and of none else’. Engaged in abstract meditation, the pious one went to Dharma. Having gone there, he spoke these (words): “O Dharma, listen now. You are always known as Dharma in the world and the Veda. How did you do the act of transfixing (me) on the stake? O sir, I certainly desire to know all that from you.”

## *Dharma said*:

33-39a. O best brāhmaṇa, listen to the cause of your fall in the previous existence. I shall tell (you) that. Please favour me. In your childhood you did this act—the sin-in your previous existence. O very wise one, listen to the cause of your fall in this existence. O brāhmaṇa, once you had gone to a solitary forest. O brāhmaṇa, having gone there, you put a living moth on a stake. Due to that act it was pained. O you of a good vow, due to that act, you were transfixed on a stake by the king. By all means (the effect of) an auspicious or inauspicious act done by one has to be undergone. You have undoubtedly suffered (the fruit of that) very small act. O best brāhmaṇa, be happy. Go at your will.” Having heard these words, that best brāhmaṇa, Māṇḍavya, with his eyes reddish due to anger then spoke (these words):

## *Māṇḍavya said*:

39b-45. O most sinful one, O you of a bad conduct, what great sin had I committed, having done which, I was (thus) transfixed on a stake? Due to the wrath (contained) in my words, be a śūdra by all means.

After some time, he was born in the family called Candra, was known as Vidura, and was highly devoted to Viṣṇu. O chief goddess, for a pilgrimage he went to the river Sābhramatī, where there is (her) confluence with Dharmavatī. Vidura, of the form of Dharma, bathed there only. He certainly cast his śūdrahood in Dharmavatī. Therefore, O goddess, those meritorious men who bathe here, go to the highest position. Those men who offer a śrāddha and gifts here on the earth, get great prosperity in this world, and rejoice in heaven.


