+++
title = "142 Kambutīrtha and Kapitīrtha"

+++
 

## *Śrī Mahādeva said*:

1-6. A man having bathed at Kambu-tīrtha, and having offered oblations to his dead ancestors, should worship Anāmaya Viṣṇu. By giving various gifts to brāhmaṇas according to the precepts he obtains Viṣṇu’s heaven due to the efficacy of this holy place. O beautiful lady, formerly the intelligent royal sage Viśvāmitra, desiring progeny, especially practised penance here. He ate (i.e. subsisted on) air, fasted, and had air as his food. He was always intent on Viṣṇu’s worship and engrossed in meditation on Viṣṇu. Due to this penance he obtained progeny. A man who desiring progeny, goes to Kambutīrtha, always obtains progeny, O you of a beautiful face. This is the truth and the (only) truth.

This is the greatness of Kambutīrtha.

7-13. Then, O best goddess, a man should go to the holy place Kapīśvara by name, which, the destroyer of great sins, is near Raktasiṃha. Formerly, during the war between Rāma and Rāvaṇa, when the bridge was being built, the monkeys took the best mountain and particularly fashioned the excellent holy place, Kapīśvarāditya by name. Here a man, after bathing and offering oblations to his dead ancestors and seeing Kapīśvarāditya is freed from (the sin of) killing a brāhmaṇa. Especially on Aṣṭamī a man should bathe there. Hanūmat and others bathed there on three days. I have told you this efficacy of Kapitīrtha. There is no doubt that a man, having bathed here and having worshipped Kapīśvara, becomes handsome and very fortunate. A man who desires strength or piety or a son in the world, would obtain all (that) due to the efficacy of Kapitīrtha.


