+++
title = "143 Ekadhāra and Saptadhāra-tīrtha"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-5. Then a man should go to the very purifying holy place (called) Ekadhāra. A man, having bathed at Ekadhāra and fasted for a night, and worshipping the master, the lord of gods, would emancipate a hundred (members) of his family. The bath here should be regarded as equal to (a bath in) Svāmitīrtha. Due to the efficacy of this holy place a man would go to Rudra’s heaven. By bathing and drinking (water) here he goes to Brahma’s heaven. Those doing meritorious deeds in the three worlds, live on this bank. They do not have a fear that is due to the sword’s edge etc. All that would quickly perish at this holy place Ekapradhāraka.

Thus is the description of the holy place Ekadhāra.

6-19. Then he should go to Saptadhāra, the best among sacred places, to which the sages have given the name Sapta-sārasvata. The great sage Maṅki made the Maṅkitīrtha in the Tretā age. In the Dvāpara age the sons of Pāṇḍu set up the Saptadhāra. The holy water that dropped from Śiva’s matted hair had seven streams. All those seven auspicious forms of Gaṅgā which flow in the seven worlds are here in Saptadhāraka. The śrāddha offered at Saptadhāra gives satisfaction to the dead ancestors. O goddess, listen to an ancient account I shall tell, hearing which, O chief goddess, a man would certainly go to Brahmā’s world. The son of Kaupītaka was well-known by the name Maṅki. He was always engaged in meditating upon Viṣṇu, and honoured Viṣṇu’s men. He studied the Vedas, and was interested in maintaining sacred fire. In his house he had two wives: Sarūpā and Viśvarūpā. Seeing them childless he feared; worried as to what to do, he was very much thoughtful. ‘Due to a son the family is stable. Otherwise the man would go to hell’. Thinking like this he never obtained pleasure. Then leaving his house, he went to the vicinity of his preceptor. “Salutation to you, O preceptor, who obliged gods. You are the lord of all the worlds, and protector of brāhmaṇas. You are the performer of sacrifices. O lord of brāhmaṇas, I salute you. O brāhmaṇa sage, I am sonless. O lord, what should I do? Tell me everything by which I shall certainly have a son. ‘A sonless man does not at all get a good position in heaven. He should, by this or that means, beget a son’. Having remembered this statement I have come to you.”

## *The preceptor said*:

20-26. O best sage go there where the river Sābhramatī is. O best sage, having bathed there you will certainly obtain sons.

Having heard his words, and having saluted him (by prostrating himself) like a staff, the lord of brāhmaṇas went to Sābhramatī. The brāhmaṇa sage Maṅki, having gone there, then practised severe penance for fourteen years. There Maṅki, the teacher of Vedas, made in the Tretā age, a very wonderful holy place, O goddess. All that proved to be the giver of a son and as fulfilling his desires. Even till today there was or there will not be a holy place like Maṅkitīrtha. That best brāhmaṇa Maṅki, having obtained sons comfortably, and having enjoyed pleasures of various kinds, went to my abode. This is a divine, pure, and very great account. By listening to it a man gets everything like sons and grandsons.


