+++
title = "145 Saṅgameśvara"

+++
 

## *Śrī Mahādeva said*:

1-16. Then (a man) should go to the great, excellent holy place called Saṅgameśvara, where the auspicious Hastimatī has joined Sābhramatī. Having received a curse from the sage Kauṇḍinya, the river became dry and came to be known in the world as Bahiścaryā. I shall describe to you that auspicious holy place, well-known in the world. It is auspicious, removes all sins, and is well-known in the three worlds. Having bathed at that holy place, and having seen Maheśvara, a man being free from all sins, goes to Rudra’s heaven. O goddess, listen. I shall tell you the reason for this curse, due to which curse she became dry. At that place where that auspicious, great river Sābhramatī, named Gaṅgā (also) is, Hastimatī joined Gaṅgā. There the sage commenced a very severe penance. When so much time passed like this, the noble sage worshipped Nārāyaṇa Nirañjana (i.e. Viṣṇu). On her bank, O chief goddess, the sage particularly passed many years. O Pārvatī, sometime by chance the rainy season arrived. In course of time, O you of a good vow, the river was full (of water). Then at night the sage Kauṇḍinya abandoned that place. At night, he was very unhappy, and crying ‘Hā, Hā’, he wept piteously. Thinking what to do, he was very much anxious. The very divine hermitage with (i.e. occupied by) the sage, went (i.e. collapsed) into Sābhramatī, due to the flood, O best goddess. O beautiful lady, many fruits, roots, and even books, went (i.e. fell) into the river, due to the flood. That best sage Kauṇḍinya cursed the river: “In the Kali-age you will be without water.” Having thus given a curse to Hastimatī, O great goddess, the best brāhmaṇa went to the ancient heaven of Viṣṇu. Even today that holy place called Saṅgameśvara exists. Seeing that a sinner is freed from such sins as the murder of a brāhmaṇa.


