+++
title = "150 Jambūtīrtha"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-14. From there a man should go to Jambūtīrtha, the destroyer of sins, for a bath, which has become like a staircase in the Kali-age. Here formerly Jāmbavat established on Daśāṅga—the best mountain—Phallus Ṛkṣarājeśa, worshipped by hosts of gods. When formerly Rāma killed the demon Rāvaṇa. Jāmbavat proclaimed with the sounds of drums ‘Rāmacandra has won; Rāvaṇa is killed in the war. Sītā is (re-)secured.’ Having proclaimed like this, he bathed in the auspicious holy place. O chief goddess, with his own name he installed a Phallus there. A man having bathed there and instantly remembering Rāma with his younger brother is honoured in Rudra’s heaven. O goddess, wherever Rāma is remembered, there freedom from the bondage of the worldly existence is noticed in the mobile and immobile (world). I should be known to be Rāma, and Rāma as Rudra only. Having realised like this, O goddess, no difference exists between (Rāma and me). In every age they who mentally mutter ‘Rāma, Rāma, Rāma’, obtain all objects. O goddess, I always remember Rāma, having heard (the name of) whom, there would never be rebirth. O goddess, living in Kāśī, I always remember the lotus-eyed Rāma with devotion and according to the sacred precept. Formerly Jāmbavat remembered that very handsome Rāma, and installed the lord of the worlds known as Jāmbavat. Having bathed, eaten and worshipped the deity there, a man obtains (and lives in) Śiva’s heaven till the fourteen Indras (rule). Merely by bathing here a man obtains strength like that of Jāmbavat due to the grace of Śrī Viśveśvara. A man who having gone here, makes a gift of land, gets a thousandfold fruit on seeing Jāmbavateśa.


