+++
title = "152 Bālāpendra-tīrtha"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-11. On the bank of Sābhramatī is the holy place, best among the holy places, known as Bālāpa, which gives enjoyment and salvation. The holy place is supported by ascetics and is the resort of the wise. There a maiden, of a very strong vow, practised a severe vow. She, the virtuous one, matchless in beauty on the earth, was the daughter of the sage Kaṇva, was an unmarried religious student named Bālāvatī. With many restraints the beautiful girl observed the vow of Sāvitrī with the resolve: ‘The Sun should be my husband’. Devoutly observing those restraints very difficult to practise, she passed ten years on the bank of Sābhramatī. By that vow of her, penance, and devotion, the lord was pleased; and due to that abundance of her devotion, god Divākara (i.e. the Sun) came to the hermitage. The large-hearted one entered (the hermitage) after taking the form of a brāhmaṇa sage. Seeing the brāhmaṇa, the best due to his penance, the best among those who knew the Vedas, she honoured him in the manner of an anchorite. She, the auspicious devotee of the Sun, said to the ascetic: “0 revered best sage, O lord, what is your order? I shall give you everything according to my capacity except my body. I am the Sun’s devotee. I shall never give you my hand. O ascetic, by means of vows, restraints and austerities I have to propitiate the Sun, the lord of the three worlds.”

12-23. When she spoke like this, Bhāskara, smiling and observing her who remained in the vow, spoke to her as it were consoling her: “O auspicious one, you are practising a severe vow, very difficult to practise. O maiden, your undertaking is as it should be. Everything is obtained by penance. Everything subsists in penance. O good one, by means of penance godhead, so also salvation, is obtained. O fortunate one, take these five badara-fruits from me.” Giving her the badara-fruits, and telling her “Cook (these)” the Sun left. He, of a great glory, taking the form of a brāhmaṇa, left that auspicious one, and waited not far away at Indragrāma without being seen by her. The Sun desiring to know her devotion remained as a brāhmaṇa. Bhāskara (i.e. the Sun) fashioned a grove of badara trees. Then the restrained girl, with the palms of her hands joined, and free from fatigue, resorted to (i.e. took) fire to cook the badara fruits. O goddess, the great one, very lustrous, cooked the badara fruits. O chief goddess, very long time passed when she was cooking (them). A great heap of ash formed there, and the day came to a close. A great heap of wood was burnt by the fire. With a desire to please the brāhmaṇa, she, after washing her feet, put them into the fire, looking charming, and burnt them for the badara(-fruits). O sinless one, again and again burning her feet, she held them up. Seeing that act of her, the Sun was pleased. Then he manifested his form to the maiden; and being very much pleased, he spoke to the girl of a severe vow:

## *The* *Sun said*:

24-32. O girl, I am pleased with your devotion, penance and observance of the vow. Therefore, O girl, may your desired object be accomplished. Endowed with penance, you will stay in my abode at this holy place. This excellent holy place will be known by your name.

It is known as Bālāpa. It stands on the bank of Sābhramatī. It is well-known in the three worlds, and was formerly praised by brāhmaṇa sages. A pure man who stays at Bālātīrtha for three nights and having bathed at sunrise looks at the reddish Sun, goes to the Sun’s heaven. No doubt should be raised in this matter. On a Sunday, or on a Saṅkrānti day, especially on the seventh, during the Sun’s equinoctial passage, so also on the lunar and solar eclipse day, he should bathe and gratify gods, dead ancestors and grandsires. Then he should give a cow made of jaggery to brāhmaṇas, and rice mixed with jaggery. Those men who worship the reddish Sun with karavīra and japā flowers, live in the Sun’s world. A man should give a red cow and a bull also. That man obtains the fruit of a sacrifice, and would not go to hell. A sick man is free from his disease, and a man that is bound becomes free from bondage. By offering piṇḍas at this holy place, grandsires are pleased.

## *Mahādeva said*:

33-45. O ascetic lady, like this there is another greatness of this holy place. Listen to an old, great account, narrated by Vyāsa. Formerly there was an old buffalo disabled due to old age. He was unable to carry loads. (So) the trader abandoned him. In the summer he went to the great river to drink water. Due to (ill) luck, he plunged into the mud and died. Due to the glory of this holy place his bones were washed away into the holy water. He became (after rebirth) the son of the king of Kānyakubja, and remembered his former birth. Remembering his own account, and the great glory of the holy place, he came (there), and after bathing (there), gave many gifts. He installed there (the representation of) Maheśvara, the god of gods. A man having bathed at this holy place, having worshipped Mahiṣeśvara, and having seen the red Sun, is freed from all sins. The water of Sābhramatī, which flows there from the east to the west, is holier than even that at Prayāga, is great, and fulfils all desires. The gifts given here to best brāhmaṇas, the oblations offered into fire here, the śrāddha offered here, and the muttering (of a hymn done) here would be inexhaustible. (By giving) the gift of a cow, land, sesamum seeds, gold, garments, grains, a bed, a seat, a vehicle, an umbrella, a man obtains whatever object he desires. Due to the grace of Śrī Maheśa and the glory of this holy place, this holy place Bālāpendra is auspicious, and always removes sins. Seeing it the sages are always free from attachment. There the holy place named Mahiṣa (and) Śveta gives great religious merit. O chief goddess, having bathed there a man is not reborn. O goddess, there is no doubt that a man gets that fruit (by bathing) at this holy place, which a man gets by bathing in Godāvarī.


