+++
title = "154 Khaḍgadhāreśvara (Khaḍgadhāra-īśvara)"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-5. On the bank of Sābhramatī is a very great purifying secret holy place. Known as Khaḍgadhāra, it will be concealed in the Kali age. A man who happens to bathe here and drinks water here occasionally, is freed from all sins and is honoured in Rudra’s heaven. Here that meritorious, auspicious Sābhramatī, following Kaśyapa, and going to the nether world, was held in his matted hair by Rudra. Rudra, with the name Khaḍgadhāra, dwells there only. O chief goddess, sinners having bathed here, have gone to heaven. In this case they narrate this old account about the very difficult vow practised by a mountaineer.

## *Pārvatī said*:

6-7. What was the name of the mountaineer? Which vow did he practise? I desire to hear all that. Tell it to me properly. O best among speakers, there is none else but you. Therefore, O god, tell me all that (as) it is beneficial to hear.

## *Mahādeva said*:

8-22. Formerly there was a very fearful, wicked (man) named Caṇḍa. He, the cruel one, was a rogue, was of a bad conduct, and fearful to beings. The wicked one constantly killed the fish with a net. He would cause to fall down deer, beasts, black antelopes and porcupines, so also many kinds of birds and pierce them with spear. The angry one killed birds and especially peacocks. The fowler was very sinful, wicked, and dear to wicked people. His wife was of that sort(only)—unchaste and suffering from severe diseases. When he was amusing himself like this, much time passed. Once the sinful one remained on a bilva tree at night with a bow in his hand to which an arrow was fixed to kill a boar. Thus he, without winking his eyes, passed the night. Even though he was angry, he cut off (i.e. plucked) many leaves of the bilva tree on the Caturdaśī of the bright half of Māgha, O daughter of the (Himālaya) Mountain. Those (leaves) fell on the Phallus that was at the root of that bilva tree through (his good) luck. All that became the worship of Śiva. By throwing mouthfuls (on the Phallus) the ignorant, wicked fowler gave it a grand bath. That wicked fowler became free from sins at the time of moonrise in the bright half of the month of Māgha. His impetuous wife devoid of hope and without food, also came near him—i.e. at the place where the fowler remained. He had not secured any hog, or deer or buffalo (as his hunt). So that woman had brought (for him) food to eat. He saw his impetuous, cruel-eyed wife coming (to him). That wife of him fell into water—into a river. Just then she said to Caṇḍa: “Come on, eat quickly the flesh of fish that I have now brought for you. O fool, what did you do the previous day? Flesh is not seen by your side. You have ruined your family (as) it (will have to) fast (now).”

23-31. Having heard these words of Caṇḍā, he of a fierce form, had become one of a pure heart due to the Śivarātri-fast and keeping awake at night. He of a pure vow (went) to the river to bathe. When the wicked one was bathing, a dog came there. O chief goddess, the dog ate all that flesh there. Caṇḍā was very angry, and approached the dog to strike him. Then that angry Caṇḍā was warded off by Caṇḍa: “Do not hit him. What evil has he done?” She said: “This wicked one has eaten the food. O fool, what will you who are hungry, eat today?”

## *The* *mountaineer said*:

I am pleased with (the fact) that the dog has eaten the food. What is the use of this transient and infirm body? O passionate woman, those who with full sincerity nourish their bodies, should be known as sinners, outcast from both the worlds. Therefore, giving up pride, passion and wickedness be composed by considering the truth; and be steady with the knowledge of the truth. O you beautiful lady, with the vow of Khaḍgadhāra I shall today abandon this my body. What is the use of my living long?

32-36. Saying so, when he drew his sword and (was about to) cut off his head, many attendants prompted by Śiva came (there). Many aeroplanes also came near him. The mountaineer having seen those aeroplanes and the attendants also, spoke with great devotion to them: “Why have all of you, wearing (rosaries of) rudrākṣa, come (here)? All of you resemble crystal; all of you have the crescent moon on your crests; all of you have braided and matted hair; you have your garments covered with hide; you have adorned yourselves with the necklaces of serpents’ hoods. You are endowed with majesty. Your valour is like that of Rudra. O tell me the proper truth.” The attendants of Rudra, asked at that time by the mountaineer, spoke:

## *The attendants said*:

37-41. O Caṇḍa, we are sent by Śiva, the highest lord. Accompanied by your wife, come quickly, and get into the carriage. Due to the effect of the act, viz. your having worshipped the Phallus on Śivarātri, you have obtained the highest position.

Thus addressed by Vīrabhadra, he, laughing a little said: “What meritorious act have I, a sinful, foolish, wicked mountaineer, interested in hunting, done? I am always acting sinfully. How shall I live in heaven? Tell (me) how I have today worshipped the Phallus. I, having a great curiosity, am asking (you). Please tell (it to me).”

## *Vīrabhadra said*:

42-47. O Caṇḍa, Mahādeva, god of gods, called Gaṅgādhara, lord of Umā, is today pleased with you and with your wife. Today you did what was proper for the occasion and worship also. While looking for a boar, O Caṇḍa, you plucked the bilva leaves; they fell on the top of the Phallus at that time. Therefore, O lord, you are meritorious. On the great (bilva-) tree you certainly kept awake. Due to that keeping awake the lord of the universe was pleased. Under the pretext of watching the boar, O glorious hunter, you observed a fast on the Śivarātri day, though by chance. Due to that fast and keeping awake the magnanimous best god was pleased. The very dignified giver of boons gives all boons to favour you.

48-53. Thus addressed by the intelligent Vīrabhadra, the mountaineer also got into an excellent aeroplane, while the attendants, deities and all beings were watching. At that time large drums, kettle drums and musical instruments sounded. There were the sounds of lutes, flutes, tabors, with dancing and acting. Chief gandharvas sang, and bands of celestial nymphs danced. He, being fanned with chowries, and with various umbrellas (held over his head), was taken with great ceremony near Śiva. Even the mountaineer reached (Śiva) due to a bath at a holy place and worshipping Śiva. Then what to say of those men who in this world offer flowers etc., fruits, sandal, tāmbūla and sacred grains with faith and devotion to Śiva, the highest soul? They are Rudras. There is no doubt about this.

## *Mahādeva said*:

54-57. Since then that holy place is well-known as Khaḍgadhāra. O chief goddess, in the Kali age, it will be hidden. O you daughter of the (Himālaya) Mountain, those who bathe (here) in the month of Māgha or Vaiśākha, and especially on the full-moon day of Kārtika, are released. Vasiṣṭha, Vāmadeva, Bharadvāja and Gautama come here to bathe and to see god (Śiva) the Trident-holder. The Phallus remained there in the (first) three ages. O Pārvatī, it does not remain (there) in the Kali age. At that time the sage Viśvāmitra had cursed me.

## *Pārvatī said*:

58\. I certainly desire to hear from you, O lord of gods, how that curse was pronounced upon you by the sage.

## *Mahādeva said*:

59-72. O goddess, on one occasion the great ascetic Viśvāmitra came to this very wonderful sacred place, Khaḍgadhāra. Having bathed in the Sābhramatī, he paid me visit. Worshipping (me) in various ways he always remained there. O beautiful lady, there was at that time a very wicked hunter of a sinful form. He put flesh on (the Phallus of) Śiva. Seeing that flesh (there) again, Viśvāmitra then said: “Oh! the sinner has done a wicked deed. The highest soul, Śiva, has not punished him: Therefore, I shall, having determined, certainly curse him.” Having thought like this, he then cursed me, O goddess. “In this terrible Kali age you will remain completely hidden.” Having thus cursed me, that best sage left. Since then, O goddess, due to the sage’s curse, I am hidden. If they especially offer a worship at my place, their sin perishes at that moment only. Those who having fashioned a clay image of me worship it, especially live at this place of (i.e. sacred to) me. In this Kali age it is called Khaḍgadhāreśvara. In Kṛta (age) it was (known as) Mandira; in Tretā (age) it was known as Gaurava. In Dvāpara (age) it was known as Viśva, and Khaḍgeśvara in Kali (age). O chief goddess, my place lies on the southern side. Knowing this, a wise man, fashioning (my) image there, worships (it) everyday. He would obtain the desired fruit. The man obtains, on the earth, religious merit, worldly prosperity, sensual pleasures and (ultimately) salvation. O chief goddess, there would come no misery to those who offer incense, light, articles of food, so also sandal etc., to Maheśvara, the lord of the worlds; this is the truth, the (only) truth, O beautiful lady.


