+++
title = "155 Dugdheśvara"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-4. To the south of Khaḍgadhāra is a highly purifying holy place called Dugdheśvara, which destroys all sins. One who bathes and sees Śiva (called) Dugdheśvara at this holy place, gets instantly relieved of the pain due to sin. Dadhīci practised penance at the auspicious bank of Sābhramatī since it is meritorious as Candrabhāgā has joined Gaṅgā there. Everything like a bath, gifts, muttering (of hymns), worship and penance (done) there, becomes inexhaustible by the power of Dugdhatīrtha.

## *Pārvatī said*:

5\. O lord, I desire to hear about the origin of Dugheśvara. O lord of gods, tell (me about) the greatness of Dugdhatīrtha.

## *Mahādeva said*:

6-26. Formerly in the war between gods and demons gods were defeated by demons. Intent on fleeing they came to Dadhīci’s hermitage. Having abandoned their weapons there only, the gods went to the ten directions. Then having heard the uproar of the demons, Dadhīci Bhārgava, after having submerged the weapons in water, drank them. After (some) time the gods, eager to take the missiles, (came there) with Bṛhaspati. In the hermitage serpents sported with mongooses with pleasure. Seeing many such wonders in that hermitage, all the gods were very much amazed. At the place where the auspicious Sābhramatī has joined Candrabhāgā, they saw the excellent sage seated on a seat shining with great lustre like the sun, accompanied by fire and by his wife Suvarcā. All the excellent gods saw after salutation the best sage like Brahmā with Sāvitrī. Then the gods led by Bṛhaspati said: “It is already known in the three worlds that you are a donor. We have approached you with a request. All of us are full of fear. Please give us our missiles.” The best, very intelligent sage, thus addressed, said to the gods: “O gods, submerging them with a hymn, I drank them (up).” Then the gods said to the brāhmaṇa: “To kill the demons quickly give your bones.” The brāhmaṇa said, “(Here) they are given.” Speaking like this to them he sent his wife to the hermitage. Then the delighted, very intelligent brāhmaṇa smiled and said to the gods: “O gods, I have drank them. Take them (back) properly.” Saying so, O goddess, the brāhmaṇa, proficient in abstract meditation resorted to it. Then with deceitful words the gods said to the smiling brāhmaṇa: “O brāhmaṇa, how can we get them as long as you are alive?” The brāhmaṇa sage laughed and said: “Wait for a moment. O gods, I myself shall abandon my body today.” Speaking like this, O goddess^(,) that brāhmaṇa, proficient in abstract meditation, resorted to it, and instantly went to heaven, whence he does not return even today. Then all the hosts of gods, seeing him dead, thought: ‘How shall we cut up (his body)?’ Then Indra called Surabhi and said to her: “By my words lick up the body of the best brāhmaṇa.” Saying “all right” and honouring his words, she licked it at that moment only. The cow instantly made that body fieshless. Gods took those bones, and fashioned weapons (with them). The missile (made) from his backbone was Brahmaśiras.

27-40. Having fashioned weapons and missiles, the very powerful and brave gods, intent on destroying Vṛtra, quickly went (to him). Then Suvarcā, Dadhīca’s wife, who was sent for the accomplishment of the mission of gods, having come (there) saw her dead husband and (his) body cut up. The chaste lady, knowing that entire deed of the gods, was angry. Then Suvarcā, the very angry wife of the excellent sage, pronounced a curse: “O very wicked gods, you were cursed many times, and (yet) you are greedy. Therefore, may all of you with Indra, be childless from today.” Thus she spoke. That female ascetic thus cursed the gods. Sitting at the root of the aśvattha tree, she stayed on the bank of Sābhramatī. That pregnant chaste lady cut off her belly. From her womb the child of noble Dadhīca came out. That great lord Pippalāda was actually the incarnation of Rudra. The mother Suvarcā laughed, and said (these) important words to the child Pippalāda: “Live near this aśvattha tree, O illustrious one, and be auspicious to all.” Talking just like that to her son, that chaste lady Suvarcā went to her husband through profound meditation. Thus that wife of Dadhīca followed her husband to heaven. Those gods, having fashioned the weapons and missiles, who were very powerful and brave, who were led by Indra, and who were eager (to fight) came to the demons. The desire-yielding cow poured out milk at the place where the brāhmaṇa (Dadhīca) had perished. By the power of the sage the milk became of the form of a Phallus. O goddess, it is known as Dugdheśvara (situated) on the bank of Sābhramatī. Since then the holy place is well-known on the earth by that name. Its greatness is matchless, and destroys sins merely by being heard. Those men too, who devoutly listen to the (greatness of) Dugdheśvara, getting free from sins, go to the great position of Rudra.


