+++
title = "156 Candreśvara"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-15. To the east of Dugdheśvara where the river named Candrabhāgā has joined (Sābhramatī), there is a highly purifying holy place. There god Candreśvara, always giving religious merit dwells. He is Śiva who is always all-pervading and who, the great one, gives happiness to people. Those who always bathe and meditate here, would get the fruit of that due to worshipping Śiva on (the bank of) Sābhramatī. Soma (i.e. the Moon) practised penance here for a long time. Therefore, (the Phallus of) Maheśvara called Candreśvara was installed here. Śukra also practised penance near Candrabhāgā. Therefore, the holy place is superior to (other) holy places on the earth. O chief goddess, the Phallus fashioned by the sages is concealed in Kali(-age). Undoubtedly a golden Phallus is seen there. Those men who, coming here, bathe and drink (water) and worship Śīva [Śiva?], obtain religious merit and worldly prosperity. Those who especially do the act of giving a bull etc. enjoy (in) heaven, and then go to Śiva’s abode. O goddess, those men who will everyday come for a bath near Candrabhāgā, should be known as meritorious. Those men who go to the other bank and worship Śiva, Śrī Hara, named Candreśvara who cuts off sins (are meritorious). Those best men who, having come here, especially do the muttering (in honour) of Rudra etc., should be known to be of the form of Śiva. O best goddess, those men who always bathe here, should be known to be Viṣṇu’s forms. There is no doubt about this. Those who again offer here a śrāddha with sesamum-piṇḍa, also go to Viṣṇu’s position due to the efficacy of the offering of the piṇḍa. Here gifts should be given and a bath should be taken according to the proper rite. Having bathed here men are absolved of (the sins) like killing a brāhmaṇa. Those who especially plant a fig-tree on this bank, go, after death, to Śiva’s position (and stay there) as long as the Moon and the Sun (remain there in the sky).


