+++
title = "157 Pippalāda-tīrtha"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-5. Near Dugdheśvara there is a charming, highly purifying, holy place, well-known in the world by the name of (i.e. after) Pippalāda. Formerly the sage desiring acquittal from the debt of his father, the noble Dadhīca, practised penance here, and by the words (i.e. the order) of his mother, he produced a Kṛtyā[^1] (i.e. a fearful female deity) resembling the submarine fire. A man having bathed and drunk (water) here, destroys (the sin of) the murder of a brāhmaṇa. Pippalāda, the lord of gods, is concealed on the bank of Sābhramatī. O goddess, by bathing there a man would enjoy salvation. The planting of fig trees should be done properly. Having done this, O great goddess, a man is free from the bondage of his deeds.

[^1]:  Kṛtyā: A female deity to whom sacrifices are offered for destructive and magical purposes.

## *Pārvatī said*:

6-7. Explain to me why that Kṛtyā was produced. O lord, tell me what that Kṛtyā did formerly. Which son brought her for the acquittance of the debt of his father?

## *Mahādeva said*:

8-11. That excellent sage Dādhīca (i.e. Dadhīca’s son). came (here) for (practising) penance. The great-souled sage practised a great (i.e. severe) penance here. A demon named Kolāsura came there to create an obstacle. He certainly caused many obstacles. That was noticed by his (i.e. Pippalāda’s) good son, the intelligent Kahoḍa. O chief goddess, for the destruction (of the demon) he produced the Kṛtyā there. She killed the great demon named Kola. Therefore, O Pārvatī, the holy place is concealed in Kali(-age).



