+++
title = "158 Nimbārkadeva-tīrtha (Nimbārka Deva)"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-11. Next to Pippalāda is an excellent holy place called Picumandārka on the bank of Sābhramatī, destroying disease and bad odour. Formerly in the war with (the demon) Kolāhala, the demons vanquished gods. (Being) subtle, they entered trees with a desire for (saving) their life. There Śambhu remained in the bilva (tree), the immutable Viṣṇu in aśvattha, Indra in śirīṣa, and god Sun in nimba (tree). Thus the gods properly remained like that in the trees. Till the powerful Viṣṇu killed the demon Kolāhala, they remained resorting to the trees. The god that resorted to a particular tree, became one with it. Therefore, one should not destroy it. Thus due to the Sun’s taking rest (here), Picumandārka is an excellent holy place which removes a disease after a man takes bath in it, and which is on the bank of Sābhramatī. After going there, if a man would especially worship the Sun, he gets the desired fruit by worshipping (him). Those men who after having gone there, recite the twelve names, are meritorious till they live. There is no doubt about this. An intelligent man who would recite these twelve names, viz. Āditya, Bhāskara, Bhānu, Ravi, Viśvaprakāśaka, Tīkṣṇāṃśu, Mārtaṇḍa, Sūrya and Prabhākara, so also Vibhāvasu, Sahasrākṣa and Pūṣan, obtains, O daughter of the (Himālaya) Mountain, wealth, sons and grandsons.

12-14. A brāhmaṇa who, resorting to (i.e. reciting) each name would worship (the Sun) on the earth, would be endowed with wealth and mastery of the Vedas for seven existences. A kṣatriya obtains a kingdom. A vaiśya would get wealth. A śūdra secures devotion. Therefore, a man should recite (this) great hymn. There never was, nor there will be, a holy place superior to Nimbārka [viz., *nimbārkadeva-tīrtha*]; having bathed and drunk (water) here a man would certainly enjoy salvation.


