+++
title = "159 Koṭaratīrtha"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-13. A little away from it is the excellent Siddhakṣetra, O goddess. Formerly Aniruddha was chosen by Citralekhā for Uṣā. He was taken to Bāṇāsura’s city formerly and he stayed in his (i.e. Bāṇāsura’s) house. Checked by nooses and arrows, he then remembered Koṭarākṣī. She is actually the power of Viṣṇu, always engaged in protecting (the devotees). Kṛṣṇa installed (the image of) this goddess here on the bank of the river. Due to the hymn of Aniruddha, returning to Dvārakā, after having vanquished Bāṇāsura in a battle, she actually came near (him). A man having carefully bathed for one year at that holy place, and having seen Koṭarākṣī’s face, obtains much wealth. A man bathing at Siddha-tīrtha, and seeing (the goddess) living at Koṭara, is honoured in Rudra’s heaven (after being taken) in a vehicle of (i.e. to which) lions (are yoked). O beautiful lady, even by remembering her, he too is freed. Therefore, those men who go here, enjoy salvation. A man, after having gone there, should especially bathe, and should deliberately recite the hymn of Koṭarākṣī, O Pārvatī. Koṭarākṣī has a universal form. She has great divine power. She is superior in strength. She in Tripurā, is the destroyer of Tripura; is Śiva and of the form of Śiva. She is said to be the daughter of Sarasvatī. She is Durgā. She removes misery. She is Bhairavī, Bhairavākṣī, and Lakṣmī, to whom the people (i.e. devotees) of the goddess are dear, O Chief goddess. Thus various names (of her) are mentioned. Those who recite them go near Śiva. O beautiful lady, those wise men who mutter the hymn composed by Aniruddha, get freed from troublesome bondage. This is the truth, and the (only) truth. The holy place fashioned by Koṭara on the earth is best among holy places. Merely on seeing it the heaps of sins (of a man) perish.


