+++
title = "161 Somatīrtha"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-7. A man (then) should go from there to Somatīrtha which is hidden on the bank of Sābhramatī. Bhava having come out from the nether world, became Kālāgni there. When a man bathes at Somatīrtha and sees Someśvara Śiva, he undoubtedly obtains the fruit of drinking Soma. The man becomes handsome, fortunate, enjoys (pleasures), is proficient in all sciences in this world, and would go to Śiva after death. O beautiful lady, in this matter I shall tell you an old account; listen to it; hearing it one is free from the sins like that of the murder of a brāhmaṇa. Sage Kauṣītaka especially practised a penance. He gave up food, and was very much engaged in eating leaves (only). Then he subsisted on air and was devoted to meditation on the self. Thus for many ages he practised severe penance there. Some time, fortunately (for him) Maheśvara was very much pleased. “O brāhmaṇa, I shall (give) you all that you ask for.”

## *Kauṣītaka said*:

8-11. O lord of gods, let a Phallus spring up here by your grace. Let there certainly be here the god called Someśvara, Having bathed and eaten here, may a man obtain his desired fruit. If the best men especially mutter hymns of Rudra etc. at this place, they obtain religious virtue and worldly objects. A sonless man gets a son, and a poor man obtains wealth. One desiring a kingdom undoubtedly gets that kingdom. O lord, if you are pleased, give all that to me.

## *The* *lord said*:

12-17. Then the lord of gods gave everything to the twice-born. Since then the holy place is well-known as Somaliṅga. Those who worship Sadāśiva with sandal or bilva-leaves, obtain happiness due to the birth of a son etc. in the human body (i.e. existence). Similarly, he who, on a Monday, goes to Śiva’s temple, always gets his desired objects due to the grace of Somaliṅga. O goddess, having gone there, with whatever desire a man offers a fruit etc. all that desire is surely fulfilled. Those who worship god Śrī Maheśa, Pinākin with karavīra flowers or pārijāta flowers, obtain, O best goddess, the best position of Śiva.


