+++
title = "165 Bhūtālaya (Bhuteśvara), Ghaṭeśvara, and Vaidyanātha (Tīrthas)"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-5. From there a man should go to the holy place Bhūtālaya which is a place removing sin. A fig tree called Bhūtālaya and (the river) Candanā (flowing) towards the east are there. A man who, having bathed at Bhūtālaya observes a fast on the Kṛṣṇāṣṭamī, and offers black sesamum, is not born as an evil spirit. He who offers a pitcher of water with sesamum, dedicating it to the dead ancestors, frees them from the state of an evil spirit. The man by uttering whose name a man bathes is freed from the state of an evil spirit. A man should bathe in the pure water at the holy place of Bhūtālaya and should see the fig tree called Bhūtālaya. By the grace of Bhūteśvara he would not have fear from evil spirits.

This is (the description of) Bhuteśvara-tīrtha.

6-8. A holy place superior to this is known as Ghaṭeśvara. Having bathed there and seen him, a man would surely enjoy salvation. There is that great holy place on the (bank of) Sābhramatī, (known as) Ghaṭa. Having seen Mahādeva there, a man is liberated. There is no doubt about it. The man who, having gone there, especially worships the fig tree, secures on the earth desires entertained by his mind.

This is (the description of) Ghaṭeśvara-tīrtha.

9-10. Thence a man should devoutly go to the holy place well-known as Vaidyanātha. A man, having bathed at the holy place and engaged in worshipping Śiva, and gratifying his dead ancestors, would obtain the fruit of all sacrifices. Vijaya, born from the god, and destroying all sins (is there), seeing whom a man always gets his desired objects.


