+++
title = "166 Pāṇḍurāryā-tīrtha"

+++
 

## *Mahādeva said*:

1-8. A greater holy place than Vaidyanātha, giving all kinds of supernormal powers and best of all holy places, is said to be excellent. Dharma’s son, having powerfully taken a tax from Bibhīṣaṇa, the lord of demons, commenced the great sacrifice Rājasūya. When the southern quarter was conquered (i.e. regions of the south were conquered), Nakula, Pāṇḍu’s son installed with great devotion Pāṇḍurāryā, giving enjoyment and salvation. A man, having bathed in the water of the Sābhramatī and having saluted Pāṇḍurāryā, obtains the eight superhuman (yogic) powers like the one of becoming as small as an atom[^1] and great intelligence. No doubt should be raised in this case. If a man with a pure mind salutes Pāṇḍurāryā, it should be regarded by those who know the truth, to be a worship offered for a year. A man, having cast his body near Pāṇḍurāryā at that holy place, reaches the peak of Kailāsa and would be an attendant of Caṇḍeśvara. Formerly, Hanūmat practised there a very difficult penance. Due to the prowess of the holy place, the power to jump over the ocean was produced (in Hanūmat).

[^1]:  Aṇimā—One of the eight superhuman powers or siddhis. The eight powers are: (1) Aṇimā—The power of becoming as small as an atom. (2) Laghimā—The power of assuming excessive lightness at will. (3) Prāpti—The power of reaching anything e.g. touching the moon with a finger-tip. (4) Prākāmya—Irresistible will. (5) Mahiman—The power of increasing the size at will. (6) Īśitva—Superiority, greatness. (7) Vaśitva—The power of subduing passions. (8) Kāmāvasāyitva—Suppression of desires.



