+++
title = "169 Varāha-tīrtha"

+++
 

## *Maheśa said*:

1-6. Then the divine river after her confluence with Vārtraghnī, has entered with Bhadrā into the ocean, the abode of Varuṇa. The ocean also, having come there with a desire to do what is dear to her, and due to his affection for Sābhramatī, brought about the pleasing union. Bhadrā who was the friend of Subhadrā formerly, actually taking the form of Śrī, helped her on the way. Their confluence on the northern shore of the ocean is meritorious. A man who, after bathing (there) offers pure water, after saluting Varāha, would obtain Varuṇa’s place. Lord Viṣṇu entered the ocean along that path, vanquished all the demons, the enemies of gods, then the god, Yajñavarāha, agitated the ocean, sported there, for a very long time, and came out through Kardamāla.

## *Pārvatī said*:

7\. O god, tell me in detail the entry of Yajñavarāha into the Sābhramatī and his exit through Kardamāla.

## *Mahādeva said*:

8-11. I shall tell you about this sport of Viṣṇu (in the incarnation of) Varāha, in the interior of the earth, done formerly. O daughter of the Himālaya Mountain, listen. He who is actually the lord, took up the form of a boar. Having taken up the form for the success of the mission of the gods, the lord of gods, holding the divine earth (on his tusks), came out of the place (called) Kardama. O beautiful lady, a great holy place has come about there. A man who bathes there, enjoys salvation. There is no doubt about this. A man should perform a śrāddha here for the release of his dead ancestors. Freed with them, he goes to the great world giving happiness.


