+++
title = "032 Satyavān Meets Śatrughna"

+++
 

## *Sumati said*:

1-9. O dear one, this king too who was well known by the name Satyavān pleased by means of his duty Raghunātha, the lord of the worlds. Being pleased (with him) the lord of Ramā (i.e. Viṣṇu) gave him unswerving devotion to his feet, difficult to obtain through crores of religious deeds by his worshippers. He, full of pity and not being fatigued, everyday told the purifying tale of Śrī Raghunātha to people. He beat with sticks, causing fear even to Yama, the man who did not worship Ragunātha (i.e. Rāma), the lord of Ramā (i.e. Viṣṇu). He made every man who would be above the age of eight till he would be eighty years old, observe the fast of Ekādaśī. To him Tulasī was dear; his neck never abandoned the excellent garland from the lotuslike feet of Raghunātha. He was venerable even to the sages. How then was he not (so) to others? He loved remembering Ragbunātha. His sins were washed. His misfortune was destroyed. He, knowing that the very wonderful horse of Rāmacandra has come, will come and give you the kingdom free from troublesome fellows. O king, I have told you the best (thing) that you have asked for. O lord, what more do you ask? Order it (and) I (shall) do it.

## *Śeṣa said*:

10\. The horse, possessing many wonders, went into the city. Seeing him, all the people went to the king, and reported to him.

## *The people said*:

l1-12. A certain horse, shining with a note on his forehead white like the water of Gaṅgā, has come.

Hearing those charming and pleasing words uttered by the people, the king laughed and said (to them): “Ascertain whose horse that is.”

13-20a. They told him: “A horse, looked after by Śatrughna, has come from the city of king Rāma.” He, having heard the very pleasing, two-lettered name of Rāma, marked with a faltering sound, was very much delighted in mind: “The horse of that Rāma, the lord of Ayodhyā, who is constantly thought by me has come with Śatrughna to my city. Hanūmān who serves the feet of Rāma and who never forgets Rāma in his mind, will also be there. I (shall) go there where there are Śatrughna, (Hanūmat) the son of Maruta (i.e. the Wind) and other men who serve the lotus-like feet of Rāma”. He ordered his minister: “Quickly come, taking all the royal wealth with me. I shall go to look after the excellent horse of Raghunātha, and to do (i.e. to offer) service to Rāma’s lotus-like feet, which is difficult to be had.” Saying so he with his soldiers went out to Śatrughna.

20b-26. Just then Rāma’s brother (Śatrughna) along with his soldiers reached the city. Mighty heroes roared; chariots produced big sounds; there were the sounds of the triumphant conches; everywhere there were the flute-sounds. King Satyavān, having come along with his ministers, saluted (Śatrughna’s) feet and presented to him his very wealthy kingdom. Śatrughna, having recognised the king, observing Rāma’s vow, gave his great kingdom to his son named Rukma. He, endowed with truth, and of great glory, having embraced the very glorious Hanūmat of mighty arms and also other devotees of Rāma, regarded himself blessed; and with Śatrughna, he was delighted in mind. Just then the horse well-protected by heroes went a long way off. Śatrughna along with that king and heroes went (after the horse).


