+++
title = "088 Sumanā on Kinds of Sons"

+++
 

## *Sumanā said*:

1-11. (Now) I shall describe to you the son connected through debt. Someone having taken debt from someone dies. The giver of wealth (lender) being a son, or a brother, or a father, or a beloved, would, always wicked internally, remain in the form of a friend. He, of a rough figure, would not at all notice virtue(s). He always speaks cruel words to his relatives. He eats sweet (articles of food), and always enjoys pleasures. He is always engaged in gambling, and longs for stealing. He steals money from the house, and, when prevented, gets angry. Every day he abuses his father and mother. He is a thief; he frightens (others); he speaks very harsh words. Thus having seized his wealth, he remains happily. In childhood he takes formidable wealth through the ceremony performed at his birth etc. Again on the occasions of marriage etc. (he takes money) many times and in various ways. In this way the wealth is reduced, and he says this much also: ‘All this—the house, the field—is mine. There is no doubt about it.’ Every day he torments his father and mother with strong sticks, pestles and by ruthlessly plucking their hair. On the death of his father and mother the very cruel one becomes affectionless and harsh. There is no doubt about it. He never performs the śrāddha-rites and never gives gifts. O king, dear sons become like this.

12-16a. O best brāhmaṇa, I shall describe to you the inimical son. When childhood has come, he always behaves as a son. He, while sporting, would beat his father and mother. Having beaten them and again and again laughed he goes away. Again he comes there and is always angry with his father and mother, and abuses them every day. Thus, due to wealth he always indulges in inimical acts. Then again having beaten his father and mother, the wicked-souled one just goes away due to the power of the former enmity.

16b-21. Now I shall describe how the proper son would become dear. As soon as he is born, he would do what is agreeable, and by means of sportive beatings (he would do what is agreeable) in his childhood. Then, after he attains youth, he would do what would please his mother and father. Through devotion (to them) he would please them, and by means of affection, words, and conversing with them in a pleasing way, he would gratify both of them. Coming to know of the death of the elders, he weeps through affection (for them). Being extremely afflicted he performs all śrāddha-rites and offers them piṇḍas. He gives them support of life. Being resolute, he, having the three debts, would certainly, through affection, emancipate them. O dear one, since he would be a proper (son), he would give (to him from whom he borrows). There is no doubt about this. O very wise one, he becomes a son in this manner.

22-27a. Now before you I shall describe the neutral son, O dear one. He always behaves in a neutral manner. He does not at all give. He does not receive. He does not get angry, or is not pleased. O best brāhmaṇa, the neutral one does not go away after abandoning (his parents). Servants, beasts, so also horses, elephants, buffaloes—all these are connected (with a man) through debt. One of us, or both of us have not taken anything fraudulently, nor have we made any deposit with anyone in our former existence; I am not pleasing anyone. O dear one, listen for a moment. (Right) from our childhood I have not had enmity with anyone in the former existence; and O best brāhmaṇa, I have not abandoned my husband. Realising this, be calm; give up (this) useless anxiety. O lord, you never snatched (anything) from anybody; nor have you given (anything) to anyone. How will (then) wealth come to you? Do not be surprised, for whatever is obtained by one who guards (i.e. tries to guard) it, does not remain (with him).

27b-32. Realising thus, be calm; give up (this) useless anxiety. To whom do the sons, dear wife, kinsmen and relatives belong? In this mundane existence nobody belongs to anyone (else). There is no connection (between two persons), O best brāhmaṇa. Men of wicked feelings, deluded by infatuation and illusion (say:) “This is my house; this is my son; this is my wife.” O dear one, the bond of the worldly existence appears to be untrue.


