+++
title = "091 Happy End of Devaśarman’s Story"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1-6. That very wise Devaśarman along with that Sumanī took a bath according to proper rites at the very famous and holy sacred place called Kanakhala in (i.e. on the bank of) Gaṅgā in Vaiśākha when the Sun was in Aries. Observing curbs and restraints, he worshipped Viṣṇu according to the proper rites, and gave something (by way of gifts) according to his capacity. He ate food fit to be eaten during days of fast, slept on the bare ground, and practised the vow of celibacy. He became emaciated by the practice of penance like Kṛcchra (i.e. mortification of the body) and meditated upon Nārāyaṇa in his heart. When the full-moon day arrived, he gave honey, sesamum seeds etc., so also he devoutly gave food, a cow along with other presents, to brāhmaṇas, and requested the brāhmaṇas for the absence of a defect in (the fruit of) bathing there. That beautiful, chaste wife, solely devoted to her husband, every day served her husband, after bathing and worshipping Viṣṇu.

7-14. The couple, undoubtedly looking upon themselves as fortunate, went home, well-pleased. Due to the efficacy of that religious merit, he had, after some time, unlimited wealth, grains, and (other) riches. He obtained four sons who were endowed with modesty, were proficient in sacred texts, knew the ways of the world, were devoted to Viṣṇu, were solely devoted to their mother and father, whose intellect was unbounded, and who were instructed for (having the fourfold) goal of human life, were well-known, knew the Vedas and were devoted to Brahman, who were endowed with all virtues, and were famous. The couple, having enjoyed the full rich pleasure from the sons, took, after a long time, a great (i.e. auspicious) bath in Vaiśākha, due to devotion to him (i.e. Viṣṇu) and the favourableness of their religious merit, O king. As Viṣṇu is actually said to be the lord of Vidyā (i.e. knowledge) and of Lakṣmī (i.e. prosperity), in the same way the month of Vaiśākha is dear to Viṣṇu. O sinless one, I have told you in a slightly abridged form this importance of (the month of) Vaiśākha, which, O hero, I had formerly heard from (my) father (i.e. Brahmā).


