+++
title = "093 Divyādevī Is Married to Vīrasena"

+++
 

## *Nārada said*:

1\. Having heard these wonderful words of Jātūkarṇa, the king having respectfully saluted the learned sage, said:

## *Divodāsa said*:

2a. O sage, how would she now be free from this affliction?

## *Jātūkarṇa said*:

2b-4. I shall tell you about a very meritorious (act) by (doing) which she would be happy. Though generally it is not to be disclosed, I shall tell it to you. Though the act is small, it is wonderful (and) so would destroy (the fruit of) hundreds of bad acts. As due to the power of meditation upon Viṣṇu great and full sin perishes, in the same way a formidable (sin) perishes due to the (daily) morning bath and gifts (given) in the month of Vaiśākha.

5-6. As elephants flee due to the fear of a lion, similarly all heaps (of sins) perish due to morning bath at a holy place when the Sun has entered Aries and due to the eulogy of Viṣṇu. Certainly sins run away due to a (daily) bath at dawn in Vaiśākha, as serpents run away due to Garuḍa’s lustre.

7-11a. Therefore, Divyādevī, after having listened to greatness of Vaiśākha, and having listened to the sin-removing eulogy of Viṣṇu, should again be given (in marriage). She will enjoy the happiness of the company of her husband. O king, that Sudeva also is born as the mighty king of the Pāṇḍya country due to the religious merit (obtained by him) by means of bathing in Revā in the month of Vaiśākha. Give him only your daughter purified like that by the (Vaiśākha) bath, and again by (her) listening to Viṣṇu’s eulogy (in the month of Vaiśākha). No doubt should be entertained about this. O king, see the wonder. The fruit of a pious act is said to be the same in this world and in the next one.

## *Nārada said*:

11b-15. Just on hearing this the king was delighted, and made his daughter perform the entire rite as told by Jātūkarṇa. He married Divyādevī to that Vīrasena only, the chief of the Pāṇḍya country and her only friend in her former birth. With Vīrasena, her friend due to her deeds in her previous existence, she who well practised vows, enjoyed many objects of senses. O Ambarīṣa, I have in brief told you a little about the greatness of Vaiśākha. What else would you like to hear?


