+++
title = "113 The Requirements for Narrating a Purāṇa"

+++
 

## *Śrī Rāma said*:

1-6. In the sky are seen seated in aeroplanes auspicious ones having many forms, good wives, and hundreds of women. At every step they are honoured by thousands of men and women. Twenty damsels, delicate with (good) figures and beauty, are singing. One is carrying a small box; some have their arms attached with (i.e. are carrying) chowries. (Some) have taken a pair of tala fans and are fanning. Another (man) has made the pillow of her lap. He has given his hand in the hands of one. He is surrounded by many flatterers. His lotuslike face is blooming due to jests of many kinds done (i.e. indulged in). In one aeroplane, he, having the moon’s brightness is seen. In the aeroplanes having hundreds of women, the auspicious lord is seen. Have these done (acts of) religious merit? Or is it (simply) Viṣṇu’s illusion, O sage?

## *Śambhu said*:

7-11. These are meritorious brāhmaṇas, leading a householder’s life. Your (father) Daśaratha had given that food to them. Once a thought arose in (the minds of) them who are my hearts, as, ‘we who depend upon others are happy here. Here hundreds of men depend on us. Due to that religious merit all of us enjoy as we desire. We are waited upon by good women, and are endowed with the pleasure of kingdoms. We are free from old age and death, and we are always young.’ Having thought like this, all the brāhmaṇas went to Vasiṣṭha’s hermitage. Having honoured them who had come (to him), Vasiṣṭha said (these) words: “O best brāhmaṇas, speak quickly why you have come (to me).”

## *The* *brāhmaṇas said*:

12-17a. All of us desire to get into an aeroplane which is endowed with all riches and which goes according to the desire (of the occupant). O preceptor, procure it for us.

Hearing this thought (i.e. desire) of them, Vasiṣṭha spoke (these) words: “O brāhmaṇas, Purāṇa which destroys sins, should always be listened to. In it only are seen righteousness (dharma), material welfare (artha) and sensual enjoyments (kāma).” Saying, ‘All right’, the sages went to sage Aṅgiras who was proficient in Purāṇas, was the greatest (sage), knew all sacred texts, all the scriptures and Purāṇas, and always did good deeds. Having saluted him, they spoke these words to him: “O brāhmaṇa, our life is fruitful, we are contented, since, O sage, we have seen you.”

## *Aṅgiras said*:

17b-22a. I shall do the work for which you have come (to me). With a desire to listen to Purāṇas you have come here. I shall narrate to you the sacred precept which destroys all sins, gives all (kinds of) knowledge, is divine, has sprung up from the knowledge of truth, gives (i.e. creates in one) devotion to Śiva, is charming, gives (i.e. creates in one) devotion to Viṣṇu, is auspicious, which would give (one) a beautiful woman, which (contains) auspicious knowledge of various kinds, discloses the science of sexual love, has enjoyment and salvation as the chief (aim), which illuminates various systems of philosophy, tells about various (kinds of) devotion, which narrates daring courage in devotion, gives the rules about a vow, a site etc. and about (applying) the sacred ash and about worship.

22b-25. The Padma Purāṇa is said to have been accomplished from the lotus of Brahmā. It is narrated by Śiva, and (contains) the description of Pramatha’s (an attendant of Śiva) form. This is told elsewhere in the Padma Purāṇa itself. Formerly, Vasiṣṭha, when asked by Dilīpa, narrated it. O best sages, listen to it, (thereby) you will have all knowledge.

Then, by his words the brāhmaṇas got interested in listening to the Purāṇa. They said to the sage (Aṅgiras): “Now doing what, and how should we listen to it?” He too told everything.

26-33. “Listen to the ancient practices. A man (who wants to listen to a Purāṇa) should salute him who knows the Purāṇa and then should offer him a respectful seat. Then saying, ‘(Please) be seated’, he should worship him with sandal and flowers; or he should also offer him wealth and tāmbūla. He should say to him: ‘O brāhmaṇa, tell (us) the auspicious story from the Purāṇa.’ For the accomplishment of religious merit, material welfare and sensual enjoyments, he should listen to it not by sitting upon a cot or (any other high seat) but (should listen to it) by sitting upon a low seat. The knower of the Purāṇa, having said to the listener, ‘Listen’, should recite this hymn: A man deserves to (i.e. should) explain the Purāṇa (after saying) ‘Salutation to Viṣṇu, Śiva, Gaṇeśa and Sarasvatī’ and having saluted the desired deity. Every day he should listen (to the Purāṇa) or as he would desire. In the same way he should listen to the narration up to the end, (and then) should do his duty. The listener should silently reflect on it; he should silently listen to it. Otherwise Sarasvatī would be angry, and due to her anger dumbness would come. Therefore, the listener should offer tāmbūla etc. (to the narrator); and according to his capacity, he should also undertake the subsistence of the speaker (i.e. the narrator).

34-38. At the commencement (of the narration) of the Purāṇa he should give (the narrator) a pair of washed garments, or should give him a subtle garment or a pair of garments, and (should give him) a great, lovely, beautiful, strong and soft seat. Similarly he should give (him) gold, and cows, a residence etc. O best of all brāhmaṇas, formerly Daksiṇāmūrti Śiva narrated this to sages residing in heaven.” Then all the sages, having saluted him seated on the seat, and having separately given him a tāmbūla, remained there with a desire to listen (to the Purāṇa). He too, narrated the whole Purāṇa, which gives everything. The best sages listened to it till the last chapter.

## *Dilīpa said*:

39\. A holy place was reached by the aeroplane which moved according to the desire (of the occupant), was equipped with all luxuries, and was fully provided with all facilities.

## *Vasiṣṭha said*:

40-46a. O king, you have not asked enough. That is said to be holy which enables one to be more sportive, O king. He should make Śiva’s temple white with whitewash on all sides. He should have women who are endowed with beauty and graceful movements, adorned with all ornaments, skilled in (singing) many good songs, and proficient in various kinds of dancing. There should be four, eight, or six women sounding a drum. Two should be powerful, two should be professionals having the bow of a lute and drum-stick. Four should be dancers, and one should be a contented singer. One or two are said to be knowing singing well and not garrulous. Two should be kept for (playing upon) the lute, and six or eight are silent. All should be beautiful and should have graceful movements. All should be of firm breasts. They should be skilled in the ways of sexual love and should be trustworthy. Their dresses should be of very fine garments, and their eyes unsteady like (flashes of) lightning.

46b-52. O king, he who has caused women like this to dance (even) on one day, gets into a (divine) aeroplane in a year. His face is looked at by hundreds of women. He is honoured by many young (women). He is complete with his joy being nourished. He is without anger and jealousy. His body is smeared with pañcagandha. His face is like a piece of(i.e. small) cloud with the moon. He is like the sun. All the ten women are having brilliance like that. They have garlands of the pārijāta-flowers which have blossomed the same day and which are fragrant. All have garlands of blossomed flowers of rohi and saffron joined together. They carry the braid on their breasts. Their lips have a good (i.e. sweet) smile on them. He moves being delighted by women like these with dancing and singing. Thus he gets into a (divine) aeroplane and having lived (in heaven) for an inexhaustible (i.e. very long) period, he then would be born as a king. Having ruled over the kingdom like this (i.e. as a king) and having enjoyed the fruit (of the stay in) heaven, he will become a devotee of Śiva.

## *Śambhu said*:

53-56. Aṅgiras told the sages what Vasiṣṭha had told Dilīpa. They executed, like that, the union of song and dance of (i.e. in honour of) the lord of Umā; and having listened to the entire Padma Purāṇa, they became happy. O Rāma, these are those brāhmaṇas who are seated in the excellent aeroplane, in the sky, and appear to be happy and of delighted minds. I have told you all this as ascertained in (i.e. by) the Purāṇas. O Rāma, what other (i.e. more) than this do you wish to hear?


