+++
title = "002  Life is Restored to Vedaśarman"

+++
 

## *Sūta said*:

1-2a. Then taking it the virtuous one quickly left. By his devotion for his father, his austerities, and the power of his truthfulness and straightforwardness, Dharmaśarman attracted Dharma (i.e. Yama).

2b-3a. Attracted by the penance of that intelligent (Dharmaśarman), Dharma, who had come (there), said these words to Dharmaśarman:

3b-4a. “O Dharmaśarman, why did you invite me? I have

come. Then tell me about your work. I (shall) do it. There is no doubt about it.”

## *Dharmaśarman said*:

4b-5a. If I have (properly) served the elders, if I have devotion and steady penance, then, O Dharma, let Vedaśarman be alive, due to that (and) due to my truthfulness.

## *Dharma said*:

5b-6. O you of a good vow, as a result of your purity with restraint, truthfulness and penance, and due to your devotion to your father, your great-souled brother Vedaśarman, of mighty arms, will again obtain (i.e. come to) life.

7\. O you highly intelligent one, I am pleased with this your penance and devotion to your father. Well-being to you; ask for a boon difficult to be obtained by those who know righteousness.

8\. That Dharmaśarman thus heard those good words. He, of a great glory, said to the magnanimous Vaivasvata (i.e. Dharma or Yama):

9\. “Give me steady devotion to the worship of my father’s feet, and also liking for piousness and salvation, if you are well-pleased with me.”

10a. Then Dharma said: “This will take place by my favour.”

10b-11a. When these very significant words were uttered, the very wise Vedaśarman got up, as if he had slept; he said to Dharmaśarman:

11b. “O brother, where has that respectable woman gone? Where would be the father?”

12\. He told in brief how the father had appointed him. Knowing that, Dharmaśarman, who was delighted, said to him:

13\. “O glorious one, O brother, be favourable to me today only with (my having restored your) head and life. Who else is there like you to me on the earth?”

14\. Saying so to his brother he was eager to go to his father. He (i.e Vedaśarman) decided to go, with his brother Dharmaśarman, to their father.

15-17a. Both, delighted in their minds went to their father there (i.e. to the place where he was). Both stood close together. Then Dharmaśarman spoke to his father, the excellent and lustrous Śivaśarman: “O glorious one, due to my penance and life Vedaśarman has been brought (back). (Please) take him—your son.”

17b-18a. Then Śivaśarman, knowing his devotion, was delighted; (but) he did not say anything to him, and thought.

l8b-23. He (then) spoke to the very intelligent Viṣṇuśarman, who politely remained before him: “Child, do as I say. Today go to Indra’s heaven and fetch nectar from there—the nectar that came up from the ocean and that destroys diseases. Now I desire to stay with this wife (ofme). With good (intention) she desires me. Do that quickly so that I obtain her; otherwise she may go to other (man). Knowing me to be old this young beautiful woman might think lightly of me. O son, if you are devoted to me, do that by which I shall, in the company of this one dear to me, be faultless and free from disease.”

24-25a. Hearing these words of his magnanimous father, Viṣṇuśarman then said to his father of a blazing lustre: “I shall do all this that pleases you most.”

25b-27. Speaking thus, that pious, very intelligent Viṣṇuśarman saluted his father and went round him keeping him to his right, and due to great power, penance and restraint, went into the intermediate region between heaven and earth. When the intelligent one was (thus) going, he went to Indra with the speed of a violent wind.


