+++
title = "003  The Heroic Deed of Viṣṇuśarman"

+++
 

## *Sūta said*:

1\. Proceeding along that path, he entered the heaven. He was seen by the intelligent Indra, the lord of gods.

2-4a. Knowing his exertion, the king of gods put in an obstacle. He said to that (nymph) Menikā: “Go by my order; O you of beautiful waist, going quickly create an obstacle (in) his (way). Well-being to you. Do that to the son of that excellent brāhmaṇa Śivaśarman by which he would not come to my house.” Hearing these words of him, Menikā started quickly.

## *Sūta said*:

4b-6. She, who was endowed with beauty, and virtues like generosity, and adorned with all ornaments, sat on a swing in Indra’s garden. That clever one with large and charming eyes, singing, in a sweet voice, like the notes of a lute, a song (was seated on the swing).

7-8. Knowing her intention of causing a great obstacle, and realising that, she, being sent by Indra, would not be favourable, the best brāhmaṇa went quickly. She saw him and asked him: “O you highly intelligent one, where are you going?”

9\. Then Viṣṇuśarman spoke to that Menikā, who moved according to her will: “I am hurriedly going to Indra’s heaven for my father”.

10-11a. Menikā again spoke pleasing (words) to Viṣṇuśarman.

11b-12. “Being pierced with Cupid’s arrows, I have today sought your shelter. O best brāhmaṇa, if you desire to protect piety, (please) protect me. When I, with my mind affected by passion of love, saw you, then only I was burnt by fire of Cupid. I am bewildered, I am tormented by love. Please be disposed to favour me.”

## *Viṣṇuśarman said*:

13-15. O you of a beautiful face, the character of the lord of gods is known to me. I also know your character. O you auspicious one, I am not like this. O you lovely lady, other men like Viśvāmitra are deluded by your lustre and beauty; O you respectable lady, I am the son of Śivaśarman who has attained divine faculties through abstract meditation and is accomplished in penance. I have avoided the great blemishes like desire for sensual enjoyments right from the beginning.

16a. O you of large eyes, choose someone else; I am going to Indra’s world.

16b-1 7. Saying so, the best brāhmaṇa went hurriedly. Menakā was unsuccessful. Being asked by god Indra she repeatedly scared him in many ways.

18\. (All) those scares (put forward by her) were burnt as the heaps of hay are burnt by fire.

19\. O excellent brāhmaṇas, all those terrible scares perished due to the lustre of that brāhmaṇa, devoted to his father.

20\. That Indra again and again presented obstacles; the brāhmaṇa of great glory destroyed them by his lustre.

21\. Thus by means of the lustre of his penance, the intelligent one destroyed all. the obstacles created by even that magnanimous Indra.

22-25a. When those great, fearful obstacles disappeared, he, knowing that those obstacles (i.e. scares) which were fierce and of fearful forms, were brought about by Indra, the best brāhmaṇa Viṣṇuśarman of great lustre became angry. The glorious one, with his eyes red due to anger (said) about Indra: “Today I shall cause to fall down from his heaven Indra, who would create an obstacle to me engaged in my own duty. I shall punish him; he, who would strike, is struck.

25b. I shall thus make someone else as the guardian of gods.”

26\. Thus the best (brāhmaṇa) became ready to destroy Indra. Just then only Indra arrived there (and said:)

27-28. “O brāhmaṇa, O you very wise one, there is none else like you in penance, restraint, self-control, truth and purity. Due to this your devotion to your father, I with (all other) deities have been won over (by you). O best one, (please) forgive all my fault.

29\. Well-being to you, ask for a boon, I shall give it (even if) it is difficult.” Then Viṣṇuśarman spoke to the king of gods who had come like that:

30\. “O great Indra, the lustre of a brāhmaṇa is unbearable for gods and deities. O lord, it is (especially so) in the case of a brāhmaṇa who is devoted to his father.

31-32a. Destruction of the dignity of magnanimous brāhmaṇas should never be done. If the best brāhmaṇas are angered, they destroy Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Hara along with their sons and grandsons. There is no doubt about this.

32b-35. Had you not come today, then, I, with my eyes full of anger, would have given this best kingdom to some other person, magnanimous due to the prowess of his penance. Now that you have come, and desire to grant a boon, (then) O lord of gods, give me nectar and steady devotion to my father. O you killer of (your) enemies, if you are pleased, grant me such a boon.” (Indra said:) “So I shall give you a pious boon with nectar.”

36-38a. Speaking thus to the brāhmaṇa, Indra himself gave him nectar. He, with his heart pleased, gave it along with the pitcher. (He also said:) “O brāhmaṇa, may you always have unswerving devotion to your father.” Speaking in this way, and having dismissed the brāhmaṇa, the thousand-eyed (Indra) became pleased on seeing the brāhmaṇa’s lustre, very difficult to endure.

38b-42. Then Viṣṇuśarman, having gone to his father, said to him: “O father, I have brought from Indra, nectar, that destroys all maladies. O glorious one, with (i.e. by taking) it be healthy always. Today be greatly satisfied with (this) nectar.” Hearing these great words of his son, Śivaśarman, with his mind full of love, having called all his sons, (said to them): “(My) sons, you are devoted to (me) your father, and you do what I tell you. Be pleased (my) sons, and ask for a boon difficult to be obtained on the earth.” All listened to his words with approval.

43-45a. Having pondered, all of them said to their father: “Bring back to life that mother of us, who has gone to the dwelling of Yama. May she, of a good vow, be healthy due to your favour. O father, may you be (our) father, and this one (our) mother, even in existence after existence, and may we be your meritorious sons.”

## *Śivaśarman said*:

45b-46a. Even today, your dead mother, affectionate to her sons, will come alive; there is no doubt about it.

46b-47a. When these auspicious words were uttered by the sage Śivaśarman, their mother arrived (there) and being delighted said (these) words:

47b-50a. “A brave son is born from one’s womb for this purpose only. Men desire a good son, who would bring glory to his family and race. In the world, glorious, meritorious and pure and affectionate women everywhere desire a son of a pleasing body and bringing about merit. That woman, the very meritorious foetus after having gone into whose womb revolves there, and who would give birth to meritorious sons, is pleased.

50b-56a. How can a woman obtain, without merit, the best son, performing duties peculiar to his family, prop of the family and emancipating the father and the mother? I do not know due to which meritorious deeds (of mine) this very meritorious man, having piety as his power, righteous, and loving piety has become my husband, from whose semen I have obtained you as my sons, superior to him. This is the power of merit. You, my sons, are born as loving virtue and intensely devoted to your father. Oh, in the world even one good son is had by means of religious merit. (But see,) I got five great-hearted sons, who are sacrificers, who are righteous, and who have the prowess due to the lustre of penance.” When they were thus repeatedly congratulated by their mother, they, being full of great joy, saluted their mother.

## *The sons said*:

56b-58a. Due to great religious merit (only) a mother—a good mother or a good father is obtained. You are a virtuous mother, who became so due to our good fortune, and having reached whose womb we were nourished as a result of our great virtue. In existence after existence you two should be our mother and father.

## *The father said*:

58b-59a. O my sons, listen to a good boon, causing religious merit. When I am pleased, may my sons enjoy inexhaustible pleasures.

## *The* *sons said*:

59b-60a. O father, if you are pleased, and desire to give a boon now, then send us to Goloka, the heaven of Viṣṇu, which is free from tormentation.

## *The father said*:

60b-61a. By my favour, your penance, and this your devotion to (me) your father, go, with your sins perished, to Viṣṇu’s heaven.

61b-64a. When the sage said good words, then (Viṣṇu) having the conch, disc and mace in his hands and mounted upon Garuḍa, came there; and repeatedly said this to Śivaśarman with his sons: “O brāhmaṇa, today you with your sons, have won me over by your devotion. With your four virtuous sons and this virtuous and very loving wife come (to me)”.

## *Śivaśarman said*:

64b-65. May these (four) sons of me go to the excellent heaven of Viṣṇu. I shall pass some time on the earth with my wife and this last, excellent son, Somaśarman.

66-67a. When the sage, who (always) spoke the truth, uttered these auspicious words, the lord of gods said to those good sons of Śivaśarman: “May they go to the world causing salvation and free from tormentation and destruction.”

67b-7l. When this was said (by the Lord), all the four brāhmaṇas of truthful hearts, in a moment only took up Viṣṇu’s form. In complexion they resembled sapphires; they had held conch, disc and mace; were charming on account of all ornaments; had great prowess; were endowed with the beauty of necklaces and bracelets; they looked charming due to jewelled necklaces; they resembled the sun’s lustre and were covered with bright flames. They entered Viṣṇu’s body when Śivaśarman was looking on (i.e. in Śivaśarman’s presence). As lights go to another light, they became absorbed in Viṣṇu’s form. The best brāhmaṇas, due to their devotion to their father, went to Viṣṇu’s abode. I shall tell accurately the prowess of Somaśarman.


