+++
title = "004  Somaśarman’s Devotion Put to Severe Test"

+++
 

## *Sūta said*:

l\. When they had gone to the Goloka of Viṣṇu, beyond darkness, the very wise Śivaśarman said to his youngest (son):

## *The brāhmaṇa said*:

2-3. O very wise Somaśarman, you are very much devoted to (me) your father. Now protect this pitcher of nectar given by me. With this wife I shall go on a pilgrimage.

“O glorious one, let it be so. I shall protect the auspicious (pitcher)”.

4\. The intelligent one (i.e. Śivaśarman) having given the pitcher into the hands of the magnanimous one, continuously practised penance for ten years.

5\. The righteous one (i.e. Somaśarman) carefully protected the pitcher day and night. Then that Śivaśarman of great fame again came back.

6\. Using a trick the very wise one, becoming (i.e. turning himself into one) afflicted with leprosy, (making) his wife also like that, came, with his wife, to his son.

7-12a. The two had become lumps of flesh, as they were made so by his trick. They came near that violent (*ghora*?) brāhmaṇa Somaśarman. Somaśarman, of great glory, seeing them completely afflicted, was full of great compassion. With his neck bent through devotion, he saluted their feet (and said:) “I have never seen (persons) like you. (I have not seen anyone else) endowed with penance, with hosts of virtues and great religious merit. What has happened to you? O best of brāhmaṇas, all deities, attracted by your lustre, getting your order, always behave like your servants. Tell me the cause, O best brāhmaṇa, by which this painful disease has appeared on your wretched body?

12b-15a. This my meritorious mother, who is a loyal wife and has great religions merit, desires (i.e. is capable) to create the three worlds due to her husband’s favour. How does she suffer pain? Is there no fruit of penance? How is it that she, who is affectionate to the elders, and who serves her husband as a god, contracts an extremely painful disease like leprosy?”

## *Śivaśarman said*:

15b-16a. O glorious one, do not be sorry; the fruit due to his deeds is enjoyed by a man who has (done) a good or a bad deed.

16b-17a. O glorious one, if you desire religious merit in this world, then clean both of us who are suffering from the disease, and nurse us.

17b-19a. Thus addressed with good words, Somaśarman of great glory (said:) “I shall nurse you both who are meritorious. O best of brāhmaṇas, what has one to do (i.e. what would one get) in this world, if one does not nurse one’s elder today (i.e. at the present time) only?”

19b-28a. Speaking thus, he who was grieved due to their malady, cleansed the phlegm, urine and excrement of both of them. He washed their feet and shampooed their bodies. He himself bathed them and helped them to stand. The best and virtuous brāhmaṇa, Somaśarman, of great glory, placing them on his shoulders took them to sacred places. The virtuous (Somaśarman), conversant with the Vedas, bathed them according to sacred precepts with his own hands, and with (the recitation of) auspicious, excellent, sacred hymns, and made both of them offer oblations to the manes and worship to the deities everyday. He himself offered ghee for gods into fire and cooked excellent food. He then called both the respectable elders, well-pleased with him (for food). The brāhmaṇa (i.e. Somaśarman) everyday put them to sleep on a bed. Daily he gave them garments, flowers etc. He offered very fragrant tāmbūla to both of them. The glorious Somaśarman everyday gave them roots, water, good eatables etc. Somaśarman, of great glory, daily gave them whatever they desired.

28b-29a. In this way he always pleased them. The very pious Somaśarman (everyday) worshipped his parents.

29b-34. Calling Somaśarman, his cruel father (Śivaśarman) always abused him with censurable and harsh words; and in the presence of the sages he everyday beat his son who did his duty and did meritorious deeds. (He said to him:) “O you, disgrace to the family, you have not done well to me (i.e. have not served me properly).” He condemned him with many harsh and painful words. That Śivaśarman who was always sick, beat him with the strokes of a stick. Even though Śivaśarman did (i.e. treated him) like this, he (i.e. Somaśarman) who was pious, was never angry with him. Always happy in mind, speech and the three kinds of deeds Somaśarman propitiated his father; similarly he also daily propitiated his mother, knowing which Śivaśarman considered his own behaviour.

35-46. (He thought:) ‘Viṣṇuśarman brought nectar for me. That righteous one has religious merit and is always devoted to (me) his father.’ When thus many days which can be counted in hundreds, passed, Śivaśarman too, seeing his devotion, thought: ‘Formerly I had told by son named Yajña (i.e. Yajñaśarman): O son, throw here and there the pieces (of the dead body) of your mother. He obeyed my words (i.e. order), and did not show compassion for his mother. This grief of one who desires to give strokes on an inanimate body is smaüer; but that son Vedaśarman did a bold act; but I think that this one is superior since he does not swerve (from duty) even for a moment. He may also again do a rash act. Again he has the prowess, along with truth, due to penance. Even in everyday attendance he appears excelling (others). So at the right time I have tested his penance. (This my) son will never perish because of his devotion and truthfulness. I showed the disease of leprosy on my body through illusion; (but) he does not have disgust for phlegm, urine or excrement. He, of a great glory, cleanses the sores with his own hand. The very intelligent one shampoos (our) feet and cleanses us (i.e. our bodies). He always puts up with unbearable words (uttered by) me. (Even though I) reproached and beat (him), he always talks pleasing words. Thus my very intelligent son is unhappy. I think that he, who is troubled with many afflictions, is the ocean of maladies. I shall remove his unhappiness by the favour of Viṣṇu.’

47-53a. Thinking (thus) in his mind (i.e. to himself), the very intelligent Śivaśarman, again created the illusion and took away the water (i.e. the nectar) from the pitcher. Then afterwards, having called that Somaśarman, he said to him: “I had given (i.e. placed) in your hand nectar, that removes maladies. Give it to me quickly, so that I shall drink it. By (drinking) that I shall today be free from the disease due to the favour of Viṣṇuśarman.” When the sage Śivaśarman uttered these words, Somaśarman hurriedly got up (and rushed to) the pitcher. Seeing it empty (that is) without nectar (he thought:)‘Which sinful person has done this deed? Who has thus harmed me?’ Somaśarman was thus worried and very unhappy. ‘If I tell this account before (i.e. to) my father, he—my father—tormented by the disease, will be angry.’

53b-55. For a long time the very intelligent Somaśarman thought (to himself): ‘If I have truth and have served the elders or have practised penance with a sincre mind, or have observed the proper code of conduct by means of restraint, purity etc. then this pitcher will have nectar in it. There is no doubt about it.’

56\. When the glorious one thought (like this) and saw, the pitcher was again full of nectar.

57\. Seeing it, Somaśarman of a great glory, became joyful, and going to his father, saluting him, quickly fetching the pitcher (said to him):

58\. “O father, please take this pitcher of water (i.e. nectar) that has come (i.e. is brought by me). O magnanimous one, drink it, and quickly be free from the disease.”

59-60. Hearing these greatly meritorious and truthful and righteous and sweet words of (i.e. uttered by) his son, Śivaśarman was full of great joy and said these words:


