+++
title = "009  Instructions to Diti"

+++
 

## *Kaśyapa said*:

1-2. The intelligent Ātman, thus addressed by Dhyāna and others, desiring to give up the product of the five-natured ones, and finding out motives, abandoning his aimless body, which he did not notice when it fell down, went to them.

3\. There is no connection between life and body that were brought up together. For what reason is there a relation with wealth, sons or wife?

4-13a. O you very dear one, realising thus, be calm; do not be weak-minded. He alone is the highest Brahman; he alone is eternal. This Ātman lives in demons and gods in his own nature. He is Brahmā; he is Rudra; he is the eternal Viṣṇu. He creates all things; he protects the beings. This (Ātman) Janārdana (i.e. Viṣṇu), the pious one and of the nature of virtue withdraws (all). O you very dear one, he has created gods and demons. Gods are liberated due to their piety (while) your sons are wanting in piety. This virtue is Viṣṇu’s body, preserved by all gods. O respectable lady, one (i.e. a man) should think about proper conduct and follow proper conduct only. The meritorious Viṣṇu always favours him. Gods always lived with piety, truth and penances. Those, with whom Viṣṇu is pleased, have practised virtue here (i.e. in this world). This proper conduct is the body of Viṣṇu and truth is his heart. Viṣṇu is pleased with him who always practises them. He, who would defile truth and piety would always have sin. The very powerful Viṣṇu would be angry with him and would destroy him. Viṣṇu’s devotees, abiding by truth and penance practised piety. The virtuous one is pleased with them and protects them thus.

13b-14. Your sons, as well as the sons of Danu and Siṃhikā, who were wicked-hearted, and who lived by (i.e. committed) impiety and sins, were killed in battle by Viṣṇu, having the disc in his hand.

15-17. That Ātman whom I formerly described before (i.e. to) you only, is Viṣṇu (himself); there is no doubt about it. He is meritorious and is the guardian of all. He who lived comfortably in the bodies of the demons, resorted to sin only. He, O respectable lady, the highly intelligent one, became angry, and killed the demons. Being within and without he struck down your sons. O respectable lady, they were struck down by him who had created them.

18-19a. You should not have any infatuation for them. Listen (to my words). He who lives sinfu11y, dies (i.e. perishes). Therefore, give up infatuation, and always practise piety.

## *Diti said*:

l9b-20. Let it be so, O glorious one; I shall do as you have told me.

She, who was afflicted, and who was addressed by the sage, gave up her sorrow, after having said these words.


