+++
title = "018  The Account of Somaśaman’s Birth in a Brāhmaṇa Family"

+++
 

## *Somaśarman said*:

1-2. O sage, you told me about my sin in the former birth. O best brāhmaṇa, in what way was I forsaken by śūdrahood and did I obtain brāhmaṇahood? O you well-versed in spiritual and worldly knowledge, tell me all about it.

## *Vasiṣṭha said*:

3\. If you think (like listening to them) listen; I shall explain to you, O brāhmaṇa, what religious deeds you did in the former birth.

4-6. A certain innocent, well-learned brāhmaṇa of a good conduct, religious-minded, and always solely devoted to Viṣṇu wandered over the earth for pilgrimages to sacred places. He, the very intelligent one, while (thus) wandering, came to your house. O best of brāhmaṇas, he requested you for a place to stay (i.e. for accommodation). You with your wife and sons gave it to him (saying:)

7-9a. “O brāhmaṇa, come, come happily (i.e. you are welcome) to my house.” You repeatedly said these words to that brāhmaṇa, the devotee of Viṣṇu: “O you of a good vow, live here comfortably; this is your house. Today I am blessed; today I have visited a sacred place. Today I have obtained the fruit of a visit to a sacred place by seeing your two feet.”

9b-12. (Then) you showed him the cowpen for his lodging. Having massaged his body you also shampooed his feet. You also washed them with water. You also bathed with the water with whicḥ his feet were washed. You thus forthwith gave ghee, curd, milk, food and buttermilk to that noble brāhmaṇa. Thus with your wife and sons you pleased that very learned, noble brāhmaṇa, Viṣṇu’s devotee.

13-16. When it was the dawn of the auspicious and blissful day, on which fell (i.e. whicḥ was) the Ekādaśī (eleventh day) of the bright fortnight of Āṣāḍha (called) Pāpanaśinī (the destroyer of sins), which destroyed all sins, and on whicḥ day god Hṛṣīkeśa (i.e. Viṣṇu) goes to sleep (called) Yoganidrā, O brāhmaṇa, when that day came, all wise men having given up all domestic duties, became engrossed in meditating upon Viṣṇu. With songs and (playing upon) musical instruments they celebrated a great festival. All the brāhmaṇas praised (Viṣṇu) with (hymns from) the Vedas, and very auspicious hymns of praise.

17\. When the great festival had come, the best brāhmaṇa stayed there on that day. He (also) fasted properly.

18\. The brāhmaṇa recited the hymn to Ekādaśi. With your wife and sons you also listened to the excellent (account of) religious virtue.

19\. When that very auspicious (account) was heard by your wife and sons they urged you: “Observe this vow in the company of this brāhmaṇa.”

20-26a. Hearing those great (i.e. very important) words, giving all merit, you were determined (to observe it and so said:) “I shall observe this vow.” Then going to the river with your wife and sons, you bathed in the river. O brāhmaṇa, with a pleased mind you worshipped Viṣṇu with all (kinds of) auspicious presents and with sandal, incense etc. You kept awake by dancing and singing songs during that night. In the company of that brāhmaṇa you again bathed in the river. Saluting Viṣṇu with devotion and bathing him again and again, you worshipped the lord of gods with auspicious (objects like) flowers, incense etc. and similarly gave apresent to that noble brāhmaṇa.O brāhmaṇa, having devoutly saluted that brāhmaṇa, you gave him ample presents. Then you broke the fast, O brāhmaṇa, with your sons, wife etc. You sent him (away) with devotion and good feelings.

26b-30a. O best brāhmaṇa, you yourself observed the vow like this, due to the company of that brāhmaṇa, and due to the favour of Viṣṇu. You, endowed with a truthful conduct became (i.e. was born as) a brāhmaṇa. Due to the efficacy of that vow you obtained (i.e. were born in) a great family of brāhmaṇas, wise and of truthful conduct. To that noble brāhmaṇa, devoted to Viṣṇu, you gave well-cooked food with faith and truthfulness. Due to the efficacy of that food sweet food comes to you.

30b-33. O brāhmaṇa, in your previous birth you were deluded through folly, and your mind was pervaded with desire. (So) you collected money only. You did not give it to brāhmaṇas or to helpless persons, or to your wife, as you died through desire for a son (not being satisfied). (So) due to the effect of that sin, poverty, non-fulfilment of your desire, and loss of affection came to you. It is just the result of that sin that you were born sonless.

34-35. O brāhmaṇa, a family with good sons, wealth, grains, excellent wife, good birth or death, excellent enjoyments and happiness, kingdom, heaven and salvation, and all that is difficult to obtain (are obtained) through the favour of that magnanimous Viṣṇu.

36-38. Therefore, by worshipping that Govinda, Nārāyaṇa, Anāmaya, you will obtain that highest position i.e. the highest position of Viṣṇu. O brāhmaṇa, I have fully told you about having good sons, wealth, grains, excellent enjoyments and happiness, and all the deeds that you did in your former birth. O blessed one, knowing thus be solely devoted to Viṣṇu.

39-41. The best brāhmaṇa of great prowess was (thus) advised by Brahmā’s son (i.e. Vasiṣṭha). The noble one, being full ofjoy, having saluted Vasiṣṭha there, and having taken his leave of that brāhmaṇa (i.e. Vasiṣṭha) went home. Joyfully approaching his wife Sumanā, (he said to her:) “O auspicious lady, due to your favour that brāhmaṇa, Vasiṣṭha, told me all my former account and behaviour. Today only my delusion is destroyed. I shall just propitiate Viṣṇu and shall reach that highest position, viz. salvation.”

42\. Hearing those excellent, great, very auspicious words bringing about happiness, she, full ofjoy, said to her husband: “You are lucky (that) you are advised by that brāhmaṇa.”


