+++
title = "019  Somaśarman’s Eulogy of Viṣṇu"

+++
 

## *Sūta said*:

1-3. The very intelligent, the best (brāhmaṇa) Somaśarman, having bathed, with (his wife) Sumanā, at the auspicious (sacred place called) Kapilāsaṅgama,[^1] on the bank of Revā, causing great merit, he, the intelligent one, and of a good vow, having gratified (with oblations) gods and manes, practised penance there, with a very calm mind and with meditation, muttering with the hymn of twelve syllables (the name) of auspicious Viṣṇu—that Vāsudeva, the magnanimous god of gods.

[^1]:  Kapilāsaṅgama or Kapilā-tīrtha—Anyone bathing there and performing worship obtains a thousand brown cow. See Mahābhārata (critical edition published by the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona) 3.81.38.

4\. Always being steady and without desire and anger he saw Viṣṇu (only) (while sitting) on a seat, or (lying) on a bed or (going) in a vehicle or in a dream.

5\. That virtuous, glorious Sumanā, devoted to her husband, served only her husband endowed with penance.

6-9. Various obstacles frightened him who was meditating. Great black serpents of strong poison came near that Somaśarman; and also were seen lions and tigers. They simply frightened him. Vampires, demons, imps, spirits of dead persons and also jackals showed him terrible fear, (capable of) destroying life. Very terrible lions of various kinds, with fearful fangs and cruel came there and roared very fiercely.

10-26. The best, virtuous sage, the intelligent (Somaśarman), disturbed by the growing great obstacles was not distracted from his meditation on Viṣṇu. (Though) the best brāhmaṇa Somaśarman was very much harassed by very high winds in the rainy season, cold, or heavy showers, he did not move away from meditation. A very fearful lion roaring (terribly) came there. Seeing him, and being frightened, the brāhmaṇa (Somaśarman) remembered god Viṣṇu, who resembled a sapphire, who had put on a yellow garment, who was having a great prowess, who held a conch and a disc and a mace and a lotus, who was shining with a necklace of big pearls resembling the moon in beauty and also with jewel (called) Kaustubha[^2], whose chest shines with the divine mark (called) Śrīvatsa, whose body looked charming due to all ornaments, whose eyes resembled lotuses, whose face had a charming smile on it, and was very much pleased, who looked charming and shone with a jewelled necklace. He verily meditated upon (Viṣṇu:) “O Kṛṣṇa, affectionate to those who seek your shelter; my salutation (to you) the god of gods; what will fear do to me? I have sought the refuge of him, in whose belly remain the three worlds and the seven magnanimous ones. Where then is fear for me? I have sought the refuge, of him, the destroyer of all fears, from whom all very powerful fears like Krtyā etc. proceed. I have sought the refuge of him, who is a great fear to all sins and demons, and who is the protector of Viṣṇu’s (i.e. his) devotees. I have sought the refuge of him who is the refuge of all the eminent, magnanimous demons, the devotees of Kṛṣṇa (i.e. his devotees). I have sought the refuge of him, who being fearless destroys fears, and who possessing knowledge, destroys sins, and who alone remains in the form of Indra. I have sought the refuge of him, who, being of the form of herbs, removes diseases, and who (himself) is pure and entirely full of bliss. I have sought the refuge of him, who, himself being fixed, would move the worlds, and being sinless is knowledge (itself); (then) what will fear do to me? He, Anāmaya (i.e. Viṣṇu) is the guardian of all good people; he, the universal soul, protects the universe. I have sought his refuge. I have sought the refuge of him who, in the form of a lion, shows great fear to me (standing) in front (of me). I salute that (Viṣṇu) in the form of Narasiṃha.

[^2]:  Kaustubha—Name of a celebrated gem obtained with 13 other jewels at the churning of the ocean and worn by Viṣṇu on his chest.

27-28. (In the form of) an intoxicated, huge elephant (he) has come. I have well sought the refuge of him, who has the face of an elephant, who is endowed with knowledge, who holds a noose and a goad, who has a black face like that of an elephant.

29\. I have sought the refuge of (that Viṣṇu who in his) Boar[^3] (form) killed Hiraṇyākṣa. I have taken shelter with that Vāmana, affectionate to those who seek his shelter.

[^3]:  Varāha—the Boar-form of Viṣṇu.

30\. All the short, dwarfish, hump-backed spirits of dead persons and imps etc., holding the form of death, frighten me.

31-38. I have taken shelter with the immortal. What will fear do to me? Viṣṇu is of Brahmā, he is the giver of Brahman (i.e. takes one to the supreme spirit), he is Brahmā, and is full of the knowledge of Brahman; I have taken shelter with what (then) will fear do to me? He who is fearless, who removes the fear of the world and himself causes fear, and is of the form of fear—1 have taken shelter with him. What will fear do to me? I have sought the shelter of that Janārdana (i.e. Viṣṇu) of the form of Dharma, who is the emancipator of all worlds and the destroyer of all sinners. I shall seek his refuge who takes up a wonderful form, foreign to gods, in a war. He is always my shelter. A terrible storm afflicts my body very much. I have taken shelter with him; he is always my refuge. I have sought the refuge of that god who torments in these forms viz. of very cold, heavy showers and heat. These, of the form of death have come here, and are disturbing me. I have always taken the shelter of these forms of Viṣṇu.

39\. I take the shelter with that Viṣṇu, the first Siddha and the lord of Siddhas, whom they call all-good, the highest lord, exclusively alone, full of knowledge and brilliant.”

40\. Thus everyday meditating upon and praising Viṣṇu, the destroyer of afflictions, he brought Hari (i.e. Viṣṇu) into his heart through devotion.

41\. Seeing the exertion and courage of that Somaśarman, Viṣṇu, being delighted, manifested himself before him and said:

42\. “O very intelligent Somaśarman, listen with your wife. O best brāhmaṇa, I am Viṣṇu; O you of a good vow, ask for a boon.”

43-47. (Thus) addressed by the best brāhmaṇa (i.e. Somaśarman) having opened both his eyes, saw that god, the lord of the universe, who was dark like a cloud, who was very glorious, whose body was charming due to all ornaments, who was endowed with all weapons, who was endowed with divine characteristics, whose eyes resembled lotuses, who was with (i.e. who was clad in) a yellow garment, who, the lord of gods, was shining, who was mounted upon Garuḍa, who had held a conch, a disc and a mace (in his hands), who was the great saviour of Brahmā and others, and also of this world, who was always beyond this universe, who was above (all) forms, who was the lord of the worlds. The very glorious brāhmaṇa, full of great joy, prostrated himself before him who was accompanied by Sri (Lakṣmi or grandeur), who was shining, and had the lustre like that of a crore of suns.

48-57. With Sumanā, he joined the palms of his hands (i.e. saluted him) and said: “Victory to you; victory to you, Mādhava, who removes pride. Victory to you, who sleep on the body of the serpent (viz. Śeṣa). Victory to you, O Yajñāṅga, O lord of sacrifices. Victory to you, O eternal and omnipresent one. Victory to you, O lord of all, O eternal one, O you of the form of sacrifice; my salutation to you. Victory to you, O best among those who possess knowledge. Victory to you, O giver of everything; victory to you, O omniscient one, and cause of all. Victory to you, O lord of the original forms of souls; saltuation to you, O great soul. Victory to you, O giver of wisdom, O Prajñāṅga (i.e. having wisdom as one of his parts); victory to you, O giver of life. Victory to you, O destroyer of sins, the lord of merit. Victory to you, O Viṣṇu, the controller of merit. Victory to you, O you of the form of knowledge; salutation to you, who can be comprehended by knowledge. Victory to you, O you having eyes like lotus-petals. Salutation to you, Padmanābha (from whose navel sprang the lotus). Victory to you, O Govinda, O Gopāla, victory to you, O holder of the disc; salutation to you whose forms are unmanifest and manifest. Victory to you, O you, whose body is charming due to your valour; victory to you, the leader of valour; victory to you, O you, who have Lakṣmī as a part of your sport. Salutation to you, full of the Vedas. Victory to you, O you whose body is charming due to your valour; victory to you, O you who give diligence; victory to (you) who put an end to all exertion, victory to (you, O Viṣṇu who are yourself) exertion. Victory to you who are capable of elevation, victory to you who had the three elevations (i.e. three steps). Salutation to you, who undertake exertion and who are Dharma.

58-59. Salutation to you, having a golden seed. Salutation to you who are lustre. Salutation to you, who are of the form of great brilliance, and who are full of all lustre. Salutation to you, who destroy the prowess of the demons, and who remove evil lustre. Salutation to you who (work) for the well-being of cows and brāhmaṇas, and to you, who are the highest soul.

60-71. Salutation to you, the enjoyer of the offerings and the carrier of the oblations to gods. Salutation to you, the carrier of the oblations to the manes and to you of the form of Svadhā. Repeated salutations to you, of the nature of Svāhā, to you, who are the sacrifice and who are the purifier. Salutation to you who hold the Śārṅga bow in your hand, to Hari (i.e. Viṣṇu) the remover of sins. Salutation to you who direct the good and the bad, and who shine with wisdom. Salutations (to you), of the form of Vedas, and the purifier. Salutation to you of tawny hair, and the remover of all afflictions, to (you) the highest Keśava, and the sustainer of everything. Salutation to you who favours (all) and who are full of joy. My constant salutation to you, the eternal, pure one, the destroyer of suffering. My constant salutation to you, who are joy, who are pure and who are perfect; to you, whose feet are saluted by Rudra and who are saluted by Brahmā. Salutation to you, whose lotus-like feet are saluted by the lords of gods and demons. Repeated salutations to you who are the highest lord, who are unconquered and whose heart is full of nectar. Salutation to you, whose abode is the milky ocean; to you to whom Lakṣmī is dear. Repeated salutations to you, who are Oṃkāra, are pure, and who are stable. Repeated salutations to you who are comprehensive and who pervade (everything), and you who destroy all calamities. Repeated salutations to you of the form of Vāmana, and to you, noble Nṛsiṃha. Salutation to you, divine Paraśurāma, who killed all the kṣatriyas. Salutation to you, who are omniscient, who are Matsya and Rāma. Salutation to you, who are Kṛṣṇa, Buddha and the destroyer of Mlecchas. Salutation to you, the brāhmaṇa (named) Kapila, and Hayagrīva. Salutation to you, of the nature of Vyāsa and to you who have every form.”

72-75. Having thus praised Hṛṣīkeśa, he then said to that Janārdana: “O you purifier, Brahmā does not know you, the farthest limit of virtues; neither omniscient Rudra (i.e. Śiva), nor the thousand-eyed (Indra) is able to praise you. Who can describe you? O lord, of what kind (i.e. how limited) is my intellect? O Keśava, I have praised you, who are qualityless and having qualities. O you of a good vow, (please) forgive me for my words—bad words; I am your servant. O you purifier, O you lord of the words, (please) forgive me, birth after birth.”





