+++
title = "024  Vṛtra Duped"

+++
 

## *Sūta said*:

1-2. Having heard that her very powerful son Bala was killed, Diti piteously wept saying: “Oh, I am facing a great misery.” Having thus very piteously wept for a long time, the miserable, glorious one went to Kaśyapa, her husband, and said to him:

3-4a. “Seeing your son who had gone to the ocean, the very sinful Indra, the lord of the host of gods, with his thunderbolt killed him having the characteristics of a brāhmaṇa and just practising *sandhyā* (i.e. the daily prayer).”

4b-5. Having heard thus, (Kaśyapa) Marīci’s son got angry at that time, and was full of great anger, as it were, burnt with fire. The best brāhmaṇa plucked a hair from his matted hair, (and putting it into) pure fire (said:)

6-10a. “I shall create a son just for killing Indra.” From that fire-pool, from the mouth of fire was produced a fierce figure, full of black collyrium (i.e. very dark), and tawny-eyed, with the interior of his mouth fearful on account of the fangs, causing fear to the worlds, capable of giving a big blow with the flat of his hand, holding a sword and a shield, bright with lustre of the entire body, resembling a large cloud and strong. He said to the brāhmaṇa viz. Kaśyapa: “Give me an order. O brāhmaṇa, tell me the purpose for which I was produced; I shall accomplish it through your favour, O you of a good vow.”

## *Kaśyapa said*:

10b-11. O you highly intelligent one, fulfil the desire of this Aditi (Diti?) and of me also. Kill the wicked Indra; and when that king of gods (i.e. Indra) is killed, enjoy Indra’s position.

12-14. Thus ordered by that noble Kaśyapa, Vṛtra exerted to kill Indra. Endowed with valour, he practised archery. The thousand-eyed one (i.e. Indra), seeing the demon’s strength, power and his lustre with courage befitting a kṣatriya, was afflicted by fear. He thought of a means to kill that wicked Vṛtra.

15-16. Having called the Seven Great Sages, the god of gods sent them to Vṛtra, the lord of demons: “O best sages, you may please go (to the place) where Vṛtra is staying, and bring about a treaty between them (i.e. the demons and me).”

17\. Thus ordered and urged by that thousand-eyed (Indra) the Seven Sages then said to that demon Vṛtra:

18-21 a. “Indra offers to make friendship (with you), O best demon; make that friendship.” The Seven Sages, knowing the fact, said to the very powerful Vṛtra: “O best one, the very wise Indra desires your friendship. Then how is it that you do not do it (i.e. do not accept his offer)? O hero, enjoy happily half the position (i.e. kingdom) of Indra; let Indra have the (remaining) half. Giving up their enmity, let all demons and gods live happily.”

## *Vṛtra said*:

21b-23a. If the best lord of the gods really desires friendship, I (too) shall do (the same) by resorting to truth (i.e. truthfully); there is no doubt about this. O brāhmaṇas, if, by putting forward (i.e. by resorting to) dishonesty, Indra plays mischief, then what is the surety in this matter?

23b-24a. The sages said to Indra: “Give certainty about this. Tell us the truth if you desire friendship here (with Vṛtra).”

## *Indra said*:

24b-25a. If I behave with you falsely and dishonestly, then I shall be stained with the sins of killing brāhmaṇas etc. There is no doubt about it.

25b-27a. The very powerful (brāhmaṇas) again spoke to Vṛtra, the lord of demons: “‘I shall be stained with the sins of killing brāhmaṇas etc. There is no doubt about it.’ Thus, O very wise one, Indra has said to you. O you very intelligent one, form friendship (with Indra), with this (i.e. taking those words to be the) surety.”

## *Vṛtra said*:

27b-28a. O best brāhmaṇas, on account of your respectable manner and this truthfulness of him, I shall likewise form friendship with him.

28b-33. The chief brāhmaṇas took Vṛtra into the vicinity of Indra. Seeing Vṛtra, ready for friendship, having arrived, the pious Indra got up from his seat, and taking the material of worship quickly, offered (the same) to Vṛtra: “O very wise one, enjoy half of this great position of Indra. O best of demons, we two should stay happily.” O best brāhmaṇa, having thus produced confidence through friendship of Vṛtra, the wicked-minded one always saw his weak point. Vṛtra too was always cautious. Indra also would think day and night (to find out his weak point). He did not find out the weak point, of the noble Vṛtra.

34-43a. He thought of a stratagem to kill him. He sent Rambhā (after telling her:) “With this or that trick, delude the great demon. O auspicious one, do that to delude the great demon, so that by killing him I shall get happiness.” (Rambhā resorted to Nandanavana—Indra’s garden,) the garden which was auspicious, very divine, resorted to by pious trees, full of many trees with fruits, full of beasts and birds, looking beautiful all around with divine heavenly cars, always full of divine music of the Gandharvas and bees, full of auspicious, sweet and prolonged cooings of cuckoos everywhere, full of the notes of peacocks and the sounds of antelopes at every place, everywhere adorned with divine sandal trees and also with charming wells, pools and lakes full of water and lotuses in bloom; it looked beautiful with gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Kinnaras as well; also with divine sages and with an excellent garden. It was crowded with hosts of celestial nymphs; and with various curious and auspicious objects. It was thronged with golden paīaces, and was everywhere adorned with staffs, umbrellas and chowries, and with pitchers and banners. It was full of the sounds (of the recitation) of the Vedas and with the sounds of songs.

43b-44a. Reaching the Nandana like this, that sportive Rambhā, smiling charmingly sported there with celestial nymphs.

## *Sūta said*:

44b-51. Once that Vṛtra, dragged by death, went very joyfully with some demons, to that forest. The lord of gods and brāhmaṇas, looking for his weak point, moved unnoticed by the side of that noble one. That very wise Vṛtra, confiding (in Indra) in all matters, and knowing Indra to be a great friend, was not afraid of him. Moving (i.e. he moved) in the great auspicious forest. The forest was very charming and (full of) curious objects and crowded with bevies of women. That glorious and noble Rambhā, of large eyes, who had resorted to the cool and very auspicious shade of a sandal-tree, was seated on a swing and was playing dice with her friends. She (also) sang a melodious song, infatuating the entire universe. Vṛtra, having come there, saw that Rambhā, with charming, large eyes with his mind full of sexual desire.


