+++
title = "025  The Killing of Demon Vṛtra"

+++
 

## *Sūta said*:

I. (Vṛtra thought:) ‘Who is this woman with charming eyes, singing in graceful modes? This attractive woman shines all round. She would delude people with full emotions.’

2-3. Seeing that Rambha, of large eyes like lotuses, of plump breasts, with her body smeared with sandal, with her face resembling a lotus, (he thought) ‘Is she the abode of my sexual desire or is she charming and attractive Rati? Sent here only by Cupid, I shall certainly approach her, who is full of emotion, endowed with good form, disposed to sex, and of an extremely good disposition.’

4\. Thus the demon, very much distressed, full of great anxiety, deluded by sexual desire, prompted (like this) for a long time, went there quickly, and with his mind afflicted said to her, whose eyes were charming:

5\. “O beautiful lady, whom do you belong to? By whom are you sent (here)? Tell me what your most auspicious name is. By your extremely lustrous beauty I am infatuated. O you young lady, come under my influence.”

6-7. Thus addressed (by Vṛtra), the large-eyed one (said to him:) “O noble one, I am Rambhā; I have come to this excellent forest, Nandana, with my friends, to sport. But who are you? Why have you come to me?”.

## *Vṛtra said*:

8-10. Listen, I shall tell you who I am that have come here, O young lady. O you auspicious one, I am Kaśyapa’s son, born from fire. O you of a beautiful face, I am also the friend of Indra, the lord ofgods. I am enjoying half the portion (i.e. the kingdom) of Indra. I am Vṛtra, O you respectable lady; how do you not recognise me, under whose control have come all the three worlds, O you of an excellent complexion?

11\. O you beautiful lady, I have sought your shelter. Protect me from the (disturbance caused by) sexual desire. O you of large eyes, resort to me, who am, O dear one, distressed by sexual desire.

## *Rambhā said*:

12\. There is no doubt that today I shall submit myself to you; O hero, you should do whatever I tell you to do.

## (*He said*:)

13a. “O you noble one, let it be so; I shall do all that (you will tell me to do).”

l3b-14a. Having thus established a relation with her, the very powerful best demon enjoyed in that very meritorious forest.

14b-15. The great demon was very much stupefied by her singing, dancing, charming smile and sexual intercourse (with her). She said to that noble and best demon:

16a. “(Please) drink wine; (please) drink madhu-mādhavī (a kind of intoxicating drink).”

16b. He said to that Rambhā of large eyes and of a moonlike face:

17\. “O good lady, I am a brāhmaṇa’s son, who has mastered the Vedas and the Vedāṅgas. How shall I drink wine (an act) that is condemned?”

18-20. But that respectable lady Rambhā lovingly gave wine to him against his will. Due to civility for her he drank wine at that time. When he was extremely stupefied by the wine, and lost his senses, just then Indra struck him with his thunderbolt. Then that killer of Vṛtra (i.e. Indra) was tainted with such sins as killing a brāhmaṇa. Then the brāhmaṇas said: “O Indra, you have committed a sin.

21\. That very powerful Vṛtra relied on (you) due to our words (i.e. because we told him). You have killed him through (falsifying that) reliance on you.”

## *Indra said*:

22-24. An enemy should always be killed by this or that means. You are angry because the wicked demon, the lord of even the three worlds, the killer of gods and brāhmaṇas, the enemy of sacrifices and righteousness is killed. Is it a sign of justice? O best brāhmaṇas, first think (properly), then you may be angry if you think my injustice (i.e. if you think I have done injustice).

25-26. The brāhmaṇas were thus addressed by Indra. The best ones were also admonished by all gods like Brahmā. When that demon, the enemy of righteousness was killed, they went to their respective abodes.


