+++
title = "027  Coronation of the Kings"

+++
 

## *Sūta said*:

1-3a. That lord, Brahmā, the master of all worlds, having then consecrated on the entire kingdom (i.e. as the king of all the kingdom) that great lord, king Pṛthu, Vena’s son, of large arms and a huge body, and resembling Indra, the lord of gods, and taking into account (other) kingdoms one by one, proceeded to give each one that kingdom, which he deserved.

3b-4. The highly intelligent one consecrated Soma (i.e. the Moon) as the king of the trees, brāhmaṇas, of planets and stars, of all pious acts, of religiously conducted sacrifices, of merits and of those of an auspicious lustre.

5-8a. O best brāhmaṇa, having consecrated Varuṇa (as the chief) among the waters and of places sacred to deities and of gems, and Vaisravaṇa as the king of all other Yakṣas, the grandsire appointed Viṣṇu on the kingdom (i.e. as the king) of Ādityas, for the good of the people, O you very intelligent one. He appointed the capable Dakṣa, conversant with all religious practices, the chief of the attendants of the lord of the beings, as the chief of all auspicious objects.

8b-15. He appointed Prahrāda, knowing all religious practices, on the kingdom (i.e. as the king) of the sons of Diti and Danu. He consecrated Yama, the son of Vivasvān, on the kingdom (i.e. as the king) of the dead ancestors, and (appointed) Śiva, having the trident in his hand, (as the king) of the Yakṣas, demons, ghosts, goblins, reptiles, of all female meditating sages, of magnanimous vampires, and also of all skeletons and spirits, and of all kings. (He appointed) the great mountain Himālaya (as the king) of all mountains. The lord of gods appointed the auspicious ocean, the best sacred place of all, on the kingdom (i.e. as the king) of rivers, lakes, small wells, of pools, and wells and other divine (sacred places). Then Brahmā, the lord of gods, consecrated Citraratha on the auspicious kingdom (i.e. as the king) of all the Gandharvas. Then the four-faced god (i.e. Brahmā) consecrated Vāsuki on the kingdom (i.e. as the king) of the snakes (nāgas) of auspicious vigour and Takṣaka (as the king) of the serpents (sarpas).

16-18. In the same way, he consecrated Airāvaṇa on the kingdom (i.e. as the king) of the elephants, and Uccaiḥśravas (as the king of) all the horses, and (Garuḍa) the son of Vinatā (as the king) of all the birds. He then appointed the lion on the kingdom (i.e. as the king) of all the beasts. The lord of beings consecrated an excellent bull (as the chief) of the bulls. The grandsire (appointed) the Indian fig-tree (as the king) of trees.

19\. In this way the grandsire Brahma, the best one, having founded all the kingdoms, appointed the regents of the quarters.

20-27. The best one consecrated Sudhanvan, Vairāja’s son, as the regent—as the king—in (i.e. of) the eastern quarter. He consecrated the noble Śaṅkhapada, son of Kardama Prajāpati, as the king of the southern quarter. Similarly Brahma, the lord of beings, consecrated the son of Varuṇa Prajāpati, named Puṣkara, in (i.e. as the chief of) the western quarter. In (i.e. as the regent of) the northern quarter, Brahma consecrated Nalakūbara. Thus he consecrated the very powerful regents of the quarters, by whom even now the earth with the seven islands and (many) cities, is righteously protected according to (i.e. in) the regions (assigned to them). That illustrious Pṛthu also was consecrated as the king in accordance with the rites as seen (i.e. mentioned) in the Vedas and with all great sacrifices like the Rājasūya, in the pious period of Manu[^1] called Cākṣuṣa, which has gone by, which had great splendour and which led to the good of gods and the righteous, O you illustrious one. Then he gave the kingdom to Vaisasvata Manu.

[^1]:  Manvantara—the period or age of Manu. This period comprises 4320000 human years or 1/14th day of Brahmā, the fourteen Manvantaras making up one whole day.

28-31. O best among the brāhmaṇas, if you desire to listen carefully, I shall also tell you the minute details about the magnanimous Pṛthu. This is the basis (*adhiṣṭhāna*?) (which is) said to be very meritorious. This (alone) is always determined (i.e. definitely told) in all the Purāṇas. That man, who, devoutly and with rapt attention, listens to this (account), which is meritorious, which leads to fame, gives long life, and an auspicious stay in heaven, which is blessed, pure, causing longevity, which bestows sons and prosperity, enjoys the fruit of (performing) the horse-sacrifice. There is no doubt about this.



