+++
title = "031  The Account of Suvrata"

+++
 

## *Sūta said*:

1-5. Then Aṅga, the very lustrous one, seeing noble Indra’s wealth, enjoyment of amorous pleasures and sports (thought:) ‘How shall I have a son, endowed with piety, like Indra?’ Aṅga, the best among the righteous, thinking like this, came to his own home. Bowing down and with his neck (i.e. head) bent down (in respect) he asked Atri, his father: “Who enjoys this high position of Indra by doing pious deeds? Of what merit is this the result? What deed did he do? And of what kind was it? What kind of penance did he have (i.e. practise)? Whom did he propitiate formerly? O best among the truthful ones, tell me in detail (about) this.”

## *Atri said*:

6-8. Bravo! O noble one, you are asking me like this (a good question). O child, listen to me, who will tell you the account of Indra. Formerly there was an intelligent, excellent brāhmaṇa by name Suvrata. He pleased Kṛṣṇa, Hṛṣīkeśa, with penance. He again reached the meritorious womb of Aditi through Kaśyapa; and through Viṣṇu’s grace, he became the king of gods.

## *Anga said*:

9\. O you affectionate towards your sons, how shall I have a son like Indra? Tell me a means for that, O best among the wise.

## *Atri said*:

10-17. O you highly intelligent one, listen to the entire account of that illustrious Suvrata, in brief—as to how that intelligent Suvrata formerly propitiated Hari. The lord of the world (i.e. Viṣṇu) having observed his sincerity, devotion and meditation, gave him a great position. That Indra, sustaining the three worlds, enjoys the three worlds with the mobile and the immobile, and the (high) position, through Viṣṇu’s favour only. All this I have told you, so also Indra’s acts. O best one, Govinda (i.e. Viṣṇu) is pleased with devotion and sincere meditation. Hari, pleased with devotion, being delighted, gives everything. Therefore, O (my) son, having propitiated Govinda, who gives everything, who is the cause of everything, who is omniscient, who knows everything, who is the best man among all, you will obtain from him whatever you desire. He is the giver of happiness, of the highest truth, of salvation, and is the lord of the worlds. Therefore, O son, go (and) propitiate him; you will obtain a son like Indra.

18-19. He, having heard the words uttered by that illustrious sage, which contained the highest truth, and having understood the import of these words, he, having saluted that eternal one, left (the place). That noble Anga, having taken his leave of his father, Brahma’s son, and resembling Brahmā, reached the peak of the Meru mountain, which was full of gold and gems.


