+++
title = "035  Rambhā Helps by a Suggestion"

+++
 

## *Rambhā said*:

1-6a. Brahma was born from the Unmanifest one, and from him was born the lord of created beings, viz. the religious-minded Atri. O good lady, his son, viz. this Aṅga of a noble mind, came to Nandanavana. Seeing Indra’s glory excellent with graceful lustre, he too longed for a position similar to that of Indra: ‘If I would have such a son endowed with righteousness, (then) my existence, endowed with fame and glory, will be very blessed.’ Then he propitiated Hṛṣīkeśa with austerities and restraints. When Hṛṣīkeśa was very much pleased, he asked for a boon: “O Madhusūdana, give me a son who resembles Indra, whose lustre and valour are like that of Viṣṇu, who is a devotee of Viṣṇu, and who destroys all sins.”

6b. Then he gave (him) a son possessing all such (qualities).

7-12. Since then the best brāhmaṇa looked (for) an auspicious maiden. He saw you as you are beautiful in all limbs. O you beautiful lady, go to (i.e. accept) him; from him you will have a son, who will be righteous, who will be knowing pious ways of behaviour and whose lustre and valour will be like that of Viṣṇu. All this has been told to you, since you had asked me like (i.e. about) that. There is no doubt that this one will be a suitable groom for you. That curse of (i.e. given by) Suśaṅkha also will be ineffective. O good noble lady, when from him a son propagating righteous conduct will be born, you will be happy. I am telling you the truth, (and) the truth (only). A farmer, with great sincerity, sows the seed. O respectable lady, he enjoys (i.e. reaps) the fruit as he sows the seed. It shall never be otherwise. It would all be just like that.

13-14. This noble one is devout and possesses merit and strength; a son born from his semen will be endowed with his wealth of virtues, will be very lustrous, will be best among all human beings, will be very fortunate, of a devout disposition, and will be conversant with the principles of deep and abstract meditation.

15\. Hearing these words of Rambhā, uttered affectionately and bestowing well-being, Sunīthā entertained the notion: This is the truth, the entire truth.


