+++
title = "037  A Heretic Meets Vena"

+++
 

## *The sages said*:

1\. (If) thus was the creation of the noble Vena, how is it that giving up righteous conduct he would be (i.e. became) (a man) of wicked mind?

## *Sūta said*:

2\. Sages endowed with spiritual and worldly knowledge, and knowing the truth, tell what is good and what is bad; that would never become otherwise in the world.

3\. O brāhmaṇas, how can the curse, given by that noble Suśaṅkha, who was practising penance, not turn true?

4-8. I shall tell (you) all the sinful conduct of Vena. When he—a noble king knowing righteousness—was ruling, a man, having put on a guise, naked, of a huge body, with his head clean-shaved, of a great lustre, holding under his armpit a broom of peacock’s feathers, and a drinking-pot made of cocoa-nut in his hand reciting (texts containing) wrong doctrines, vilifying the Vedic religion, came (there). He quickly came to (the place) where Vena was (seated). The sinner entered the court of that Vena. Seeing him having arrived (there) Vena asked him a question:

9-11. “Who are you, taking up such a form, that have come into my court? Why have you come before me who am (seated) in the court? What (kind of) dress (do you have)? What is your name? What is your faith? Tell me (all this). What is your Veda (i.e. which Veda do you follow)? What are your practices? What (kind of) penance (do you practise)? What abstract meditation (do you possess)? What (kind of) prowess (do you have)? What are the real characteristics of your faith? Tell me all that and the truth before me.”

12a. Hearing those words of Vena the sinful man said these words.

## *The sinful man said*:

12b-15. In vain you are ruling. You are a great fool, there is no doubt about it. I am all-in-all of Dharma (i.e. religious practices). I am most adored by gods. I am knowledge, I am truth, I am the eternal supporter. I am Dharma (i.e. religious practices), I am salvation, I full of all gods. I have sprung from the body of Brahma; I am faithful to my promise, and not otherwise. Know me to be the chief Jaina saint, having the body of true religion. The meditating sages, intent on (obtaining) knowledge, run to me only.

## *Vena said*:

16\. What kind of acts (do you do)? What is your doctrine? What are your practices? Tell (all this to me).

## *The sinful man said*:

17-21. (That is my faith) where Arhats are the gods, and Nirgrantha is looked upon as the preceptor. Compassion is said to be the best way of life and in it is seen (to lie) salvation in (i.e. according to) this faith. There is no doubt about this. I shall (now) narrate the practices. (In this faith) there is no performance of sacrifices; there is no officiating at sacrifices; there is no recital of the Vedas; there is no offering of the three daily prayers; there is no penance; there is no charity; it is without (the exclamations viz.) svadhā and svāhā; there is no offering to gods or manes; there are no rites like sacrifices; there is no gratification of the manes; there is no (worship offered to a) guest; there is no offering to all the deities. The best worship is that of a Jaina mendicant, and the best meditation is that of an Arhat. This way of life is seen in the Jaina faith. I have told you all this i.e. the characteristics of my faith.

## *Vena said*:

22-23. (In your faith) the way of life as told in the Vedas is not seen, nor are rites like sacrifices seen; no oblations to manes, no śrāddha, no sacrifice offered to all gods, and also no charity and penance are seen. Where (then) are the characteristics of the pious way of life to be (seen)? Tell me what kind of the way of life based on compassion (you advocate).

## *The sinful one said*:

24-32a. This body of (human) beings is nourished by the five elements. This soul is of the nature of air, so they have no association. Even as in the water there is a contact of the form of bubbles, in the same way there is a contact among the beings. The earthly state is (present) in the matter; water also remains there only; fire also is seen there; powerful wind is also seen in (these) three. The state of bubbles covering the space is then produced in water, where a very bright, excellent circle is produced. It is seen just for a moment, and just after a moment it is not seen. In the same way contact among beings is seen. At the time of death, the soul departs, and the five (elements in the body) go to (i.e. merge into) the five (gross elements). Moreover the mortals being confounded by ignorance behave with one another (foolishly). Through folly they perform sraddha and offer oblations to the manes in the evening. O best king, where is the dead person (at that time)? Of what nature does he eat? (i.e. what is his state when he eats?). What is knowledge? What kind is the body (after death)? By whom is it seen? Tell us (all about it). (Only) the brāhmaṇas, being fed with sweet food go satisfied. To whom would the sraddha be offered? The faith (due to which a śrāddha is offered) has no meaning.

32b-42. I shall tell you another fierce act (mentioned) in the Vedas. When a guest goes (i.e. arrives) to the house, a brāhmaṇa (kills and) cooks (the flesh of) a great bull; or O king of kings, he would feed the guest (with the flesh of) a goat. (They kill) a horse in a horse-sacrifice, and a bull in a bull-sacrifice; a man in a human sacrifice and goats in a Vājapeya sacrifice. O great king, a great slaughter of many animals is done at a Rājasūya sacrifice. At a Puṇḍarīka sacrifice one would kill (i.e. one kills) an elephant, and at an elephant-sacrifice (they kill) an elephant. At the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice a beast is seen to be fit for being sacrificed. Thus, O prince, listen how at rites of various forms killing of beasts of various species is laid down. What are the characteristics of gifts that are given? That food should be known as left-over, (where) sumptuous food is had, and (when) in a great sacrifice they kill those (beasts) that are extremely impure. What righteousness is seen there or what fruit is seen there where those who are learned in the Vedas have prescribed the killing of beasts? Due to that (i.e. the killing of beasts) merit perishes and the (so-called) religious merit does not give (i.e. lead to) salvation. That way of life which is without compassion is fruitless. There is no doubt that the right way of life lies there where lives of beings are protected. It is not the right way of life (or righteousness) where there are offerings to gods, manes, penance, truth, and rashness without compassion, O best king. The Vedas are not Vedas where compassion is not (prescribed).

43-52a. Even a cāṇḍāla or a śūdra, who, being intent upon the gift of kindness, would protect a life, is said to be a brāhmaṇa. But that cruel brāhmaṇa who is intent upon killing beasts, is very ruthless, sinful, hard-hearted and of a cruel mind. That Veda which is without knowledge, is said to be a Veda (only) by the rogues. Veda stands firmly there where there would be knowledge. O you very intelligent one, neither truth nor rite is seen in the merciless Vedas and Brāhmaṇas and also in the brāhmaṇas who follow the Vedas. O best king, the Vedas, void of truth are not Vedas and the brāhmaṇas who are not truthful (are not brāhmaṇas). There is no fruit of charity, so gifts also are not given. As are the characteristics of śrāddha, same are those of charity. Whatever is the faith of Jīva is the giver of enjoyment and salvation—that I shall tell you. First, one with his mind being tranquil, should show kindness. One should devoutly propitiate god Jina who (has pervaded) the mobile and immobile. With one’s mind having pure thoughts, one should worship Jina alone. Salutation should be offered to that god, and not otherwise (i.e. not to anyone else). One should never salute the feet of one’s mother and father. Then what should be told about others, O best king?

## *Vena said*:

52b-53. (They say) that these brāhmaṇas, preceptors and others, and also the rivers like Gaṅgā, are holy places giving great religious merit. Is that the truth? Tell me if you desire piety (to flourish) here.

## *The sinful man said*:

54-60. O great king, from the sky the clouds shower water. Having floated in the water which has fallen everywhere on the ground and on the mountains, he would stand, and produce compassion everywhere. Rivers are but the streams of blemish. How have you heard (i.e. how is it told in the scriptures) that the holy places are (situated) in (i.e. on the banks of) them? O great king, ponds, lakes, seas, and mountains—the heaps of stones—support the earth. No sacred place can be situated in (or on) them. A cloud is the best (holy place) due to its (containing) water. If a bath (i.e. a dip in water) causes great religious merit, then why is it not (found) in the fish? If by bath purity is produced, then the fish are purified. It cannot be otherwise (i.e. it is quite certain). Sacred place and eternal Dharma (i.e. way oflife) are to be found where Jina remains. Penance and all merit due to bath etc. is settled there. O lord of kings, Jina alone is full of everything. There is no other (Dharma) than that; that is the holiest place. This is the greatest gain. So always meditate on him; you will be very happy.

61\. Censuring by (indicating) the sinful nature of the entire (Vedic) religion, the Vedas, and charity of the form of sacrifices, along with (i.e. causing) merit, the sinful one advised Aṅga’s son in various ways.


