+++
title = "044  The Boar Dies Fighting"

+++
 

## *Sukalā said*:

1-2. Seeing his own irresistible army completely vanquished by him (i.e. by the hog) who was difficult to be stopped, the king got angry with the cruel, unbearable hog. He, mounted upon a horse, and taking a bow and an arrow resembling the destructive fire at the end of the world, speedily moved in front of him.

3-7. When the lord of the herd of boars saw the king, the killer of his enemies, mounted upon the back of a horse and endowed with excellent valour, he went forth to him on the battlefield. The best hog, when struck with a sharp arrow of (i.e. by) the king, went to the soles of the feet of the horse. With a quick mind (i.e. decision) he overstepped him with a very sharp speed. The horse was afflicted by the hog. The hog did not go to (i.e. fall on) the ground. The horse, with his movement checked, and struck on the face,.fell down on the ground. Then the king just went to (i.e. got into) a small chariot. He roared with sounds of (i.e. befitting) the species of a hog. The hog, who was in the midst of the battlefield, was speedily struck with a mace by the Kośala-king seated in his chariot; and then giving up his body, he just went to the excellent abode of Viṣṇu.

8-11. When the lord of hogs after fighting with the king in the battle, fell on the ground after being struck (by the king), best gods showered excellent flowers on him. On him a great heap of flowers was accumulated and the fragrance was as it were of the Santānaka flowers. Gods, being fully pleased, showered on him sandal with saffron. Being pondered over by the king, O king, he became one having four hands. He had (on his person) divine garments. His form was divine, and with his lustre he shone as the sun (shines). When, he being greatly honoured by the king of gods and (other) gods, went to heaven in a divine car, he, casting his former body here only, again became the lord of Gandharvas.


