+++
title = "045  The Female Hog Fights Back"

+++
 

## *Sukalā said*:

1\. Then all the hunters with nooses in their hands went to the female hog. Also the brave, fearful, terrible (dogs) came (to her).

2-8. Seeing her dear (husband) killed along with the family in the great war, the female hog took her four children (i.e. young ones) and remained (there). (She thought:) ‘My husband got what he had thought (i.e. desired). He is honoured by sages and gods. The noble one has gone to heaven by means of (having performed) this act. I too shall go along the same path to heaven. The lord (i.e. my husband) waits (there for me).’ Having well determined (like this) she thought about her sons: ‘When my four sons, sustaining (i.e. continuing) our race live here, the noble, very brave hog also will have (the best position in heaven). By what means shall I protect my sons?’ Thus being engrossed in thinking, and seeing the narrow passage on the mountain, she tried to find out an extensive (i.e. wide) path to go out. Having made up her mind about her sons, O great king, she said to those sons who were very much confused: “O sons, as long as I am (alive), go (away) quickly.”

9-11. Out of them the eldest son (said): “How shall I with a strong desire to save my life go away abandoning my mother? How pitiable is my mother’s good life? I shall retaliate my father’s enmity. I shall overpower (my) enemies in the battle. He, who takes the three younger brothers to a mountain-cave by abandoning the father and the mother, is of a sinful mind. He goes only to hell crowded with crores of worms.”

12-15. She, very much afflicted, said to him: “O son, how shall I, the great sinner, go by abandoning you (here)? (i.e. I shall be a great sinner if I abandon you here.) Let my three (younger) sons (only) go away (from here).” (Then) the three younger sons only went into the interior of the forest. When they were just witnessing, the two (i.e. the mother and the eldest son) again and again, roaring due to their lustre and great strength, went to the battlefield.

16-18. Then the hunters, having the speed of wind, came (there). O king, the three (younger sons) were sent (by her) along the difficult path; and the two—the mother and the (eldest) son, remained there by blocking the path. Then the hunters, holding swords, arrows and bows came there and struck (them) with javelins, sharp discs and pestles. Keeping his mother at the back, the son fought with them. He struck some with his fang; he hit some with his mouth. He also struck with the tips of his hoofs. The brave ones fell in the battle. The hog fought in the battle. The noble king saw him.

19-23. Knowing that he was brave like his father, the very lustrous, brave son of Manu, with arrows in his hand went in front of him. Struck by the noble (Ikṣvāku) king with a sharp crescent-shaped arrow, and with his chest pierced, he fell on the ground (i.e. the hog fell dead on the ground). She became very insensible due to (the death of) her son; she herself went towards him. O king, some brave hunters, hit by her with the strokes of her mouth, fell on the ground, and some fled (away) and some died. Then the female hog causing to flee. (that) great army with her fang, appeared as (if) a female destructive deity, causing great fear, had sprung up.

24-27a. Then the queen said to him who resembled the son of the lord of gods: “O king, she has killed your large army. Tell me the reason why you are ignoring her, O dear one. To her the great king said: “I shall not kill this female (hog). O dear one, the deities have indeed seen a great sin in killing a female. Therefore one should not kill a woman. Nor shall I send anyone (to kill her). O beautiful one, I am afraid of committing a sin by killing her.”

27b-31. Speaking thus, the king, the lord of the earth, ceased (to speak). A hunter by name Jhārjhara saw that female hog, creating a havoc amidst them, and irresistible even to excellent warriors. He pierced her with a very speedy and sharp arrow. She, with the arrow stuck into her (body), and covered with blood, endowed with the majesty of valour and looking charming, was hurrying. She again struck that Jhārjhara even with her mouth. Struck with a sharp sword by that Jhārjhara who was falling, she was rent asunder. Panting (heavily) due to (exertion of) the fight, she fainted, and (though) alive on the ground, she was overpowered with great grief.


