+++
title = "051  Padmāvatī Returns to Her Husband’s Place"

+++
 

## *The wife of the brāhmaṇa said*:

1-2. When that wicked-hearted Gobhila of a bad conduct had left, Padmāvatī, being full of great grief, wept. O best brāhmaṇa, hearing her weeping, all her beautiful friends asked the princess.

3-4. (They said:) “Well-being to you, why are you weeping? Tell us your story (i.e. what you did). Tell us where the great king, your (husband) the lord of Māthura, who had invited you by addressing you (as) ‘O dear one’ is”. Weeping again, again she spoke with grief.

5-6. She told (them) everything that had taken place through error. They took her who was weeping and was extremely afflicted to her father’s house. Then the damsels told (the account) in the presence of (i.e. to) her mother. Hearing that the queen (i.e. her mother) went to her husband’s mansion.

7-10a. She told the account of her daughter to her husband. Hearing it, the king was extremely grieved. Giving her a vehicle, clothes etc. he sent her, along with attendants, to Mathurā. She went to the mansion of her dear (husband). The father and the mother concealed the blemish of their daughter, O best brāhmaṇa; but the righteous-minded Ugrasena, seeing Padmāvatī who had arrived, was glad, and again quickly said these words to her:

10b-11. “O you beautiful lady, I cannot live without you. You are very lustrous; O dear one, you are always dear to me due to your virtues, character, devotion, truth and qualities like devotion to your husband.”

12\. Ugrasena, the lord ofmen, the best king, speaking (like this) to dear wife Padmāvatī, enjoyed in her company.

13-16. The fierce foetus, causing fear to all the worlds, grew. Padmāvatī knew the cause of that foetus. Night and day she thought about it growing in her womb: ‘What is the use of this one, destroyer of the worlds, being born? Now I have nothing to do with this wicked son.’ Everywhere she enquired about a herb that would cause abortion. The lady, secured (i.e. tried to secure) a great (i.e. effective) herb for abortion. Everyday she adopted many remedies for abortion.

17-21. The foetus, fearful to all the worlds, grew. Then the foetus said to his mother, Padmāvatī: “O mother, why do you trouble yourself by (using) the herbs everyday? (The span of) life increases due to religious merit, and life becomes short due to sin. (Beings) live or die according to the ripening of their deeds. Painful foetuses depart, while others, that are immature (i.e. not properly developed) die as soon as they are born on the earth. Some others are endowed with youth. All children, old men, young men, being under the sway of vital power, die and (i.e. or) live according to the ripening of their deeds. There is no doubt that medicinal herbs, formulae and deities are only a means.

22-24. You do not know me—what kind of (foetus) I am. Formerly you have seen and heard about the very powerful (demon) Kālanemi, who is a very mighty (demon) among the demons, causing fear to the three worlds. In the great war between gods and demons I was formerly killed by Viṣṇu. To finish enmity with (i.e. to take revenge on him, I have come to your womb. O mother, do not act rashly and do not exert yourself everyday.”

25-31 a. O best brāhmaṇa, speaking thus to his mother, he ceased (speaking). His mother then gave up her exertion, (but) became very much afflicted. When ten years had passed, he grew. Then he became very lustrous, and that Kaṃsa became very powerful, who harrassed the people, the residents of the three worlds; and who, killed by Vāsudeva, went to (i.e. obtained) salvation. There is no doubt about it. Thus O dear one, I have heard like this. Whatever will happen, will happen. I have told you what has been determined in all the Purāṇas. The daughter, who lives in her father’s house, perishes. O dear one, a daughter should not have longing for staying in her father’s house. Abandoning this wicked one, a great sinner, be composed. Great sin and terrible grief would be obtained (by us if we keep her here). O dear one, enjoy with me, that leads to felicity in the world.

## *The female hog said*:

31b-41a. That best brāhmaṇa, hearing these words containing good advice, decided to forsake (his daughter). He then called me. He gave me everything like garments and decorations (and said to me). “O good one, listen. Due to your bad conduct, that best, intelligent brāhmaṇa went (away). O you wicked one, O you of a bad couduct in the family, go there where your husband is. There is no doubt about this (i.e. this cannot be otherwise); (or go to) the place which you like. Do as you are advised.” O you glorious one, after my father had said like this, I, a shameless woman, abandoned by my father, mother and (other) members of the family, quickly went away, O you beautiful lady. O you good lady, I did (i.e. could) not secure a comfortable abode. People reproached me saying, ‘(Oh) this unchaste lady has arrived.’ Void of the pride of my family, and wandering (here and there), I went from (my father’s) country, to a holy Śiva-temple in Saurāṣṭra in the Gurjara-country. It was a city full of prosperity and known as Vanasthala. Listen, O queen, at that time I was very much oppressed by hunger. Taking a potsherd in my hand I started begging. Being extremely afflicted I entered the gates of householders. People saw my form and reproached it. They did not give me alms, (saying) ‘this wicked one has come (here)’. I thus obtained proper food with difficulty, and was entirely oppressed with poverty.

41 b-43. While wandering, I saw an excellent house, surrounded by a high rampart, with a chamber for (the recitation) of the Vedas, which was crowded with many brāhmaṇas; it was full of wealth and grains, and was adorned with male and female servants. I entered that beautiful house, affluent with glory.

44\. That house which was auspicious all round was the house of that Śivaśarman only. Sudevā, afflicted with grief, said: “(Please) give (me) alms.”

45-47. The best brāhmaṇa, Śivaśarman, heard the words: “Give (me) alms”. That righteous-minded, very intelligent Śivaśarman, smiled and said to his beautiful wife Maṅgalā by name, who was of the nature of Lakṣmī: “O dear one, this enfeebled one has come to (our) door for alms. O auspicious and dear one, being full of great pity, call her and give her food. She has come to me after having recognised me.”

48-50. Maṅgalā said to her dear husband: “I shall give her food dear to (i.e. liked by) her.” Speaking like this to her husband Maṅgalā, endowed with auspiciousness, again fed me, the weak one, with sweet food. That righteous-minded, great sage Śivaśarman said to me: “Who are you that have come here? To whom do you belong? On what mission do you roam everywhere over the earth. Tell me.”

51-53. Having thus heard the words of my glorious husband, I, the sinner, recognised him by his voice. When I saw my husband, I hung down my face through shame. Maṅgalā, beautiful in all limbs, said to (our) husband: “Tell me who she is, (since) on seeing you she is ashamed. Please favour me and tell me who she might be.”


