+++
title = "054  Sukalā Gets Prepared For the Showdown"

+++
 

## *Viṣṇu said*:

1-4. When the female messenger was thus addressed by that Sukalā she went (to Indra). Indra, having understood those significant and truthful words of her, well spoken in a brief manner, and having perceived her boldness, courage and knowledge (thought:) ‘Who, (even) being a woman, would speak on the earth, words that are of the form of (i.e. endowed with) propriety and that are well-ordered and washed with the water of logic? This magnanimous one is pure and of a truthful nature. There is no doubt that she is capable of bearing the yoke (i.e. responsibility) of all the three worlds?’

5\. Due to this Jiṣṇu (i.e. Indra) thought and said to Cupid: “With you I shall go to see that beloved (wife) of Kṛkala.”

6-7. Cupid, proud of his power, replied to the thousandeyed (Indra): “O lord of the gods, let us go (to the place) where the chaste lady is (staying). Having gone there, I shall destroy her self-respect, power, strength, courage, truthfulness and loyalty to her husband. Of what account is she (to me), O lord of gods?”

8-9. Having heard (these) words of Cupid, the thousandeyed (Indra said:) “O Cupid, listen. Excessive talking is of no use. She is quite strong with true power. Due to religious rites she is quite firm. This Sukalā is inconquerable. Your valour is (of) no (use) there (i.e. against her).”

10-13. Hearing this, and getting angry, Cupid said to Indra: “I have destroyed the power of sages and deities. Of what measure (i.e. how much) is her power (about which) you are telling me? You just see (i.e. in your very presence), I shall destroy the woman. As butter, on seeing (i.e. in the presence of) the lustre of fire, would melt, similarly I shall melt her with my form and lustre. Now certainly great iṃssion has come up for me, who am going there. Why do you condemn my lustre (capable of) destroying the three worlds?”

## *Viṣṇu said*:

14-17. Having heard the words of Cupid (Indra said:) “O Cupid, I know, (even) if you raise (i.e. augment) your courage, you cannot subdue her of a holy body, meritorious due to her virtue, and behaving piously. Going from here (with you) I shall observe your strong power.” With the archer (i.e. Cupid) and with the female messenger Rati, he again went to that chaste lady, who of a great merit was (all) alone and attached to her husband’s feet, as a meditative saint would place his heart (in meditation) and make it free from uncertainty. The glorious fish-bannered god (i.e. Cupid) made (i.e. took up) a form, extremely wonderful, endowed with an unlimited lustre, alluring the chaste lady, adorned with blue (garments) and full of objects of enjoyment. Also Indra (took up a similar form).

18-24. Seeing that great man, of many amorous sports and wandering like this, full of desires, the wife of the glorious Vaiśya did not highly think of him (who was) endowed with a handsome form and (was an) appreciator of merits. The nature of that chaste lady had become endowed with truth, as water going to a lotus-petal, gets the name ‘pearl’. ‘The female messenger, whom he had formerly sent, told (me) about this appreciator of merits. This one would show in various ways his sportive form and his nature. How far this very intelligent and mischievous lover, knowing my nature would live? (Now) my body is a vacuum, and is instantly free of movements and is as good as dead. The subjects of the village of the body, have, after performing the acts called good acts, fled away. Cupid has endowed him with charm, greater than, equal to or superior to my charm. I shall talk in a wonderful way to him, who longs for me, in such a way that he, dancing with his own knowledge, powerful and endowed with joy, dies.’

25\. Thinking like this, that great chaste lady, binding her firmly with the string of truth entered her own house to know his mind definitely.


