+++
title = "055  Indra Tries to Dissuade Kāma"

+++
 

## *Viṣṇu said*:

1-3. Knowing her mind, the lord of gods said to Cupid standing before him: “O Cupid, she, who is well-equipped with the armour of meditation with truth as its soul, cannot be conquered by you. With a desire to conquer, and taking in her hand the bow called piety and an excellent arrow named knowledge, she has stood on the battlefield, like a hero proud of his valour, to fight (with you). (This is her) valour only. Now do (i.e. show) your valour. She is today capable of conquering you in the battle. What is going to happen should be thought just now.

4-5. Here only the glorious Śiva had formerly burnt you, who had opposed him. O Cupid, as a result of that evil (act of yours), you had become bodiless. (This is) just the truth. O Cupid, you had formerly obtained a horrible fruit in accordance with the deed you had performed. Certainly you will obtain a very contemptible birth (i.e. will be born in a very contemptible species). Here only you will be told (like this) along with this chaste lady.

6\. Those wise men who, in the three worlds, entertain enmity with the magnanimous, have as its fruit, sin accompanied by misery and destroying their form.

7-14. O Cupid, having proclaimed ourselves to this chaste lady, and having urged her (to continue her pious acts), we shall go. Formerly due to my contact with a chaste lady I obtained a sinful, unbearable fruit. You know this account (that) I was cursed by that Gautama also. I became one having the scrotum of a ram for ever, and you went away, leaving me there. The power of the lustre of chaste women is matchless. (Even) the creator or the sun (also) is not able to bear it. The curse formerly pronounced by the sage (-husband) of Anasūyā would (continue to) preserve this contemptible form (of you). (The chaste lady) having stopped the forcible, rising sun, very bright with lustre, stopped the curse of Kauṇḍinya pronounced by Nāṇḍavya. Atri’s wife was truthful and chaste. She made the three gods her sons. O Cupid, have you not formerly heard that chaste women are always purified by sacred rites. Sāvitrī was the daughter of Dyumatsena. She brought back here only the life of Satyavān, Aśvapati’s good son, from Yama. Chastity of women is thus well known. Who would touch the flame of fire? Or, who, except a fool, would, tying stones round his neck, (try to) cross the ocean with his hands? Or who would (try to) subdue a chaste woman who is free from attachment?” When Indra thus spoke words of prudence for instructing Cupid well, he, Cupid, having heard (these) words said to the lord of gods.

## *Cupid said*:

15-18. By your order I have come (here). Having given up patience, goodheartedness and manliness, you are telling me about her (something), which lacks energy and is full of great fear. When I shall entertain bad thoughts, O lord of gods, my fame in the world will perish. Subdued by her people will describe me, who bring about marriages to be without self-respect. The hosts of gods, demons, sages, and saints with austerity will instantly laugh at me (saying:) ‘This fearful Cupid is subdued by a woman.’ Therefore, O lord of gods, I shall go with you and shall destroy her power, self-respect, lustre and fortitude. O Indra, why are you (then) afraid here (i.e. in this matter)?

19-23. Having thus addressed the lord of gods, and having held his bow and flowery arrow, he said to Rati, standing before him: “Acting deceitfully you should go the vaiśya’s wife Sukalā, who is meritorious, who remains in (i.e. practices) truth, who knows piety and appreciates virtues. O darling, going from here do the work, helpful (to my mission), as told (by me). (Please) obey (me).” Having thus spoken to Rati, he again called Rati, standing near. (He said:) “Do this excellent job for me; subdue her through great affection. (Act in such a way) that this beautiful woman would fall in love with Indra on seeing him. O friend, listen, by all means win her over with all miraculous powers; O friend, go quickly and effect an illusory grove, having the form of (i.e. resembling) Nandana-garden, full of flowers, abounding in fruits, and resounding with the cooings of the cuckoos and the hummings of the bees.”

24-25. Having called the brave Elixir of Life, the very gratifying Flower-juice, endowed with sweet virtues, and sent him according to his wish along with Wind etc. engaged in their own duties and ordering the great army, infatuating three worlds, Cupid went with the lord of gods, to that great chaste lady, to allure (her).


