+++
title = "056  Satya & Dharma Come to Sukalā’s Help"

+++
 

## *Viṣṇu said*:

1-11a. Cupid, with the lord of gods, started to go to Sukalā to bring about a genuine destruction of her. At that time Satya (i.e. Truth) said to Dharma: “See, O very intelligent Dharma Cupid’s misdeed. I create (i.e. have created) a great place, an excellent house, of the nature of an abode, causing (i.e. giving) happiness, and called Satya (truth), Supriya (very dear) and Sudeva (with good deities), for the sake of you, the righteous and magnanimous one, and for my sake. This wicked Cupid, of a blundering mind, and of an inimical nature, would go to it and certainly destroy that excellent house of us. There is no doubt that a Brāhmaṇa with penance as his wealth as the husband, a very poius chaste woman, and a very truthful king, are, O Dharma, my abodes. There is no doubt about it. You would reside there where I am nourished with prosperity. Pu Q.ya (i.e. Merit) comes there and sports with Śraddhā (i.e. Faith). Kṣamā (i.e. Forbearance) accompanied by Śānti (i.e. Tranquility) comes to my abode. Real Dama (i.e. Restraint), and Dayā (i.e. Pity) and Sauhārda (i.e. Good-heartedness), Nirlobha (i.e. Absence of greed), along with Intelligence are there where I live. Śuci Svabhāva (i.e. Pure Nature) (stays) there only. These are my kinsmen. Non-stealing, Harmlessness, Endurance and Prosperity have come to my house. O king Dharma, listen to my blessedness. Service of preceptors and elderly persons, Viṣṇu accompanied by Lakṣmī, gods led by Agni, come to my house. Jñāna (i.e. Knowledge) accompanied by Brilliance, that would illumine the path to salvation (has come to my house).

11b-14. I always live with these in chaste women, religious persons, and in all good people that are of the form of my house. Along with you I just live with the family about which I told you. They, who are virtuous and of a good nature, have been made my abode by the Creator. O magnanimous one, I move comfortably and at will. The lord, the master of the three worlds, the threeeyed one, having the bull (viz. Nandi) as his vehicle, lives, with Śivā (i.e. Pārvatī), in his own form in my house.

15-20. This, then, is the essence of the worldly existence, of the form of a house, of a lordly nature—an abode called Śaṅkara. That is destroyed by Cupid. This Cupid formerly subdued, after having taken resort to (i.e. the help of) Menakā, the magnanimous Viśvāmitra, practising excellent penance. That wicked Cupid led the chaste, loyal Ahalyā, the dear, auspicious wife of Gautama away from great truth. All sages, knowing the genuine Dharma, many chaste women—all these my abodes were burnt by the fire of Cupid. He is irresistible, unbearable, (all-) pervasive, and very harsh to great truths. He is looking for me (saying:) ‘Where does Truth stay?’ Knowing me (i.e. finding out my abode) he, the archer, with arrows in his hands, comes; and the sinful one would destroy my house with fires.

21-25. All those having bits of sins, who are cruel, who have resorted to heretics, who are malevolent in mind, will enter the house of Satya. Subdued by the generals of the army who are untruthful and by that Chadman (i.e. Dishonesty), the sinner would ruin (and) strike (my) house with sinful weapons. The wicked, very powerful Cupid will strike me like this. Burnt by his lustre I shall be a non-entity. I desire (to have) a new house called the woman looking upon her husband as her king. This one, good and auspicious, is the dear (wife) of the meritorious Kṛkala. This wicked (Cupid) is intent on burning that house called Sukalā.

26-30a. How is it that the mighty thousand-eyed (Indra) does not know (i.e. remember) his former account (i.e. what happened to him) on account of Cupid? He became one having the scrotum of a ram due to his attachment to Ahalyā. The lord of gods (i.e. Indra), who had remained there (i.e. in Gautama’s hermitage), had perished on seeing the manliness of the sage and due to the outrage of a chaste woman, as a result of Cupid’s fault. He suffered a terrible curse, and was full of great grief. This thousand-eyed (Indra), along with Cupid, is eager to strike this Sukalā, Kṛkala’s dear wife practising meritorious acts. O Dharmarāja, O very intelligent one, act in such a way that this Cupid would not come (to her) with Indra. You are the best among the intelligent ones.”

## *Dharmarāja said*:

30b-33a. I shall lessen the lustre of Cupid and bring about his death. I have found out one remedy. You may (please) examine it now only. This very intelligent Prajñā moving in the form of a bird, may tell (i.e. announce), from the sky, the auspicious arrival of (Sukala’s) husband. She, due to the prowess of the omen, and with her mind steady, would certainly not be ruined by the wicked.

33b-35a. He (then) sent Prajñā. She went to the house of Sukalā. Making a great sound she shone like one who had been seen (i.e. favoured) by gods. Then she was worshipped and honoured with incense, lights etc. Sukalā asked the brāhmaṇa: “What would she (i.e. does she) say to me?”

## *The brāhmaṇa said*:

35b-36. The steady one announces the arrival of your husband, O blessed one. He will arrive within seven days. This will not be otherwise.

37\. Hearing these very auspicious words, she at once became very glad. (She thought that) her virtuous, dear husband, knowing righteousness, had arrived.


