+++
title = "058  Sukalā Wins"

+++
 

## *Viṣṇu said*:

1-2. Prompted by Rati, Sukalā, the beautiful wife of the vaiśya entered the beautiful grove. The chaste lady saw all the charming grove and then she asked her friend. (She said:) “O friend, to whom does this excellent, very meritorious, divine and charming grove, which is furnished with all excellent pleasures, belong?” Sukalā joyfully asked her friend (Rati).

## *Krīḍā (i.e. Rati) said*:

3\. This grove is endowed with all divine qualities of well-known inherent properties and decorations of flowers and perfumes; it is full of flowers and desired fruits; see, it is of (i.e. it belongs to) Cupid.

4-12. Having heard these words, and full of great joy, and observing the great account of the wicked Cupid, she smelt the fragrance carried by wind. (In it) wind, endowed with fragrance, blew naturally, in such a way that his (i.e. Cupid’s) arrow very easily entered her nose; but that (Sukalā) of an excellent face (i.e. beautiful) did not smell the fragrance of the flowers; nor did the very chaste lady enjoy the excellent pleasures. The delightful friend of Cupid, vanquished (by her), was ashamed, and having turned away his face, fell on the ground with bits of leaves. Juice, of an excellent brightness, and decorated with flowers and shoots, fell on the ground from ripe fruits. The flower-juice, of a melancholy nature, fallen from the fruits, was eaten (i.e. drunk) by bees, as a dead man (is eaten up) on the battle-field. Being (thus) eaten (i.e. drunk) by bee, it flew in a stream. It flew slowly only; the birds laughed at it. With many notes, full ofjoy, they happily roamed (in the grove). The birds happily remained on the mountain in the forest. He, who had resorted to a mean course, was vanquished by Sukalā.

13-14. Cupid’s wife Rati, accompanied by Prīti, went to Sukalā, and, with a smile, said to her: “O auspicious one, wellbeing to you; welcome to you; enjoy happily; your spotless form, delightful to the eyes, is liked by the magnanimous Indra. When you desire (something), tell (me); I shall certainly bring it.”

## *Sūta said*:

15-19. Seeing and hearing the two ladies (viz. Rati and Prīti) talking, she said (these) good words: “My very intelligent husband has gone away, taking with him my pleasure. I am united with my husband at the place where he remains. My desire (remains) there, so also my love. This body is without a prop.” Both Rati and Prīti, having heard what (Sukalā) said, were ashamed. Being ashamed, they went to the place where the very mighty Kāma stood. They said to the great hero of a great might, who had drawn his bow, who had resorted to Indra’s body (and therefore) who was visible to the eyes: “O you highly intelligent one, she is invincible. Give up (trying) your valour (against her). The magnanimous chaste lady always longs for her husband (only).”

## *Cupid said*:

20\. O respectable lady, if she looks at the form of this magnanimous Indra, then I shall certainly strike her.

21-24. Then that lord of gods, of a great form, who had put on a (different) garb, endowed with all pleasures, decorated with all ornaments, wearing divine flowers and garments, (with his body) smeared with divine sandal, and accompanied by that Rati, very sportively and quickly went to that place where the lady looking upon her husband as a deity (i.e. the lady loyal to her husband) stood. He spoke to the magnanimous Sukalā, behaving truthfully: “Formerly I had sent a messenger to you. Why, O auspicious one, do you not show regard for me, who have betaken myself to you?”

## *Sukalā said*:

25-28a. Well-being to you. I am protected by the magnanimous sons of my husband, and by companions; so I am not at all alone. From whom (then) do I have fear? I am protected by brave men everywhere. I do not have much time to talk. I am engaged in my duty towards him. O you very intelligent one, why do you not feel ashamed of dallying with me while your eyes are trickling (i.e. while you are old). Who are you that have come here, and are not afraid even of death?

## *Indra said*:

28b-29. I saw you having come into the grove; but you told me about the brave sons of your husband. How can I see them? Show them to me.

## *Sukalā said*:

30-34. The pious-minded, magnanimous one, whose entire piety is firm, who is always devoted, who is powerful with love, having established Truth as the chief of his own group (of allies), and placing him (to protect me) along with qualities known as Courage, Resolution, Fate and Intelligence, always protected me. Dharma thus always protects me with the pure qualities of restraint. See, Truth, along with Tranquility and Forbearance, has come to me. Knowledge, who is very powerful and very famous, will never desert me. I am bound with firm bonds of his qualities. He has just come to my vicinity. All (the qualities) like Truth etc. had been now made my protectors. All (qualities like) Piety, Gain and Restraint, Knowledge, Valour protect me only. Why do you solicit me against my will? Who are you, being fearless, that have come here with a female messenger? Truth, Piety, so also Merit and Knowledge etc. are very powerful and are the companions of my husband. They protect me in the house.

35-37. I am always having protection, and am solely devoted to Restraint and Tranquility. Even the lord of Śacī (i.e. Indra) himself is not able to win me over. Even if that powerful Cupid comes, I am always furnished with the armour of truth, and not by anything else. There is no doubt that his arrows would be futile. The great warriors like Dharma (i.e. Piety) etc. will kill you only.

38-39. Go away, run (away); now do not stand here. If you stay (here), though warded off, you will be reduced to ashes. I shall just burn you, as fire would burn wood, and in no other way, when you look at my form without (i.e. in the absence of) my husband.

40-43. Hearing (these words) (uttered by her) in the presence of even Cupid, the thousand-eyed god (i.e. Indra said:) “See her valour. Fight with your valour (with her).” O great king, all those, Indra and others, being afflicted with fear of the great curse, went to their respective places, as they had come. When all of them had gone, that Sukalā, devoted to her husband, and endowed with merit, came to her own house, thinking of her husband (only). That lady, looking upon her husband as her god, then came to her own house, endowed with merit, full of (the merit of) all sacred places and all sacrifices.


