+++
title = "060  Sukalā’s Story Ends"

+++
 

## *Kṛkala said*:

1\. O Dharmarāja, now tell me in detail how I would have final beatitude and how my dead ancestors would be liberated.

## *Dharma said*:

2-6. O you noble one, go home. She (i.e. your wife) is experiencing grief without you. Inform your wife, Sukalā practising piety, (of your arrival). Having gone home, offer śrāddha with her hands. Win over the best gods by remembering the holy places. You will have the salvation obtained through pilgrimages to holy places. He who desires to accomplish religious merit without his wife (i.e. all alone), loses (the fruit of) the stage of the householder and would wander alone in a forest. He is unsuccessful in the world, (and) the deities do not respect him. The sacrifices become successful¹ (only) when the housewife remains in the house. All alone (i.e. without his wife) he is not able to accomplish (the fruit of) piety and worldly prosperity.

## *Viṣṇu said*:

7-11 a. Having thus spoken to the vaiśya, Dharma left as he had come. That religious-minded Kṛkala also proceeded to his house. The intelligent one reached his house and saw that chaste wife (of him). The intelligent one reached his own abode along with the leader of the caravan. Seeing her husband, well-versed in Dharma, who had arrived, she performed very auspicious and meritorious (rites) on the arrival of her husband. The religious-minded one told her what Dharma did. The magnanimous one, having heard her husband’s words causing delight, and having praised the words of Dharma, agreed with him.

## *Viṣṇu said*:

11b-16a. Then that vaiśya Kṛkala remaining in the chamber of the (idol of the) deity (in his house) devotedly offered, with her, a śrāddha, giving great merit. The dead ancestors, gods, Gandharvas and sages came there in aeroplanes and praised the high-souled couple. I (i.e. *Viṣṇu*), also Brahmā and the great lord (i.e. Śiva) with the goddess (Pārvatī) and all (other) gods with Gandharvas arrived (there). I, Brahma, and the great god (i.e. Śiva) with the goddess (i.e. Parvatī), also all gods with Gandharvas, pleased with her truthfulness, said to the two who were well-versed in truth: “Well-being to you along with your wife. O you of a good vow, ask for a boon.”

## *Kṛakala said*:

16b-17a. O best gods, due to the association of the merit of which penance, have you come here to grant a boon to me with my wife?

## *Indra said*:

17b-18a. This chaste, noble Sukalā is pleasing and auspicious. We were pleased with her truthfulness. We (therefore) desire to grant you a boon.

18b-23a. (Then) in brief they narrated her former account. Having heard of the magnanimity of her behaviour, the husband was delighted. With her the religious-minded one (i.e. Kṛkala) with his eyes full of joy saluted all the deities, and again and again said: “If now all the magnanimous, ancient three gods (i.e. Brahma, Viṣṇu and Śiva) and other holy sages have favoured me and have come here, then I shall be devoted to gods like this (only) in existence after existence. Due to your grace let me have liking for piety and truth; and afterwards, O gods of great prowess, if you are pleased, I desire to go to Viṣṇu’s heaven with my wife and grandsires.”

## *Gods said*:

23b. O noble one, let it be so. Everything will take place (like this) only.

24-32. Then, O king, they showered flowers on the two (i.e. Kṛkala and Sukalā). Gandharvas, knowing the essential nature of music, sang a charming, melodious song, giving great religious merit; and the groups of the celestial nymphs danced. Then the gods with the Gandharvas, praising the chaste lady, went, after giving (Kṛkala) a boon, to their respective abodes, O best king. I have told you (how) a woman is (called) a sacred place. (Now) I shall tell you something else. I have narrated to you this entire, excellent, meritorious account. O king, a man who listens to it is free from all sins. A woman who devoutly listens to the excellent account of Sukalā, is never deserted by good fortune, truth, sons and grandsons. She is delighted with wealth and grains and would be happy with her husband. In existence after existence she would be a loyal wife, and not otherwise. A brāhmaṇa (who listens to the account) would become well-versed in the Vedas; (and) a kṣatriya would be victorious. There is no doubt that there would be wealth and grains in the house of a vaiśya. O king, a man knowing piety would become one of good conduct and happy. A śūdra gets happiness and prospers with sons and grandsons. There is great prosperity adorned with wealth and grains.


