+++
title = "063  Merit Resulting from Service of Parents"

+++
 

## *Sukarman said*:

1-6a. O best brāhmaṇa, the son properly gets (the religious merit of) a bath similar to the one in all the holy places when the drops of water, (falling from the bodies) of the mother and the father who have bathed, fall on the entire body of the son. I shall (now) tell you about the religious merit of the son who serves his father who is fallen, who is maimed, who is old, who is weak (in doing) all acts, who is ill, who is suffering from leprosy, and also his mother like that (i.e. in such a condition). There is no doubt that Viṣṇu has his mind pleased with him. He goes to Viṣṇu’s heaven, unobtainable by (even) the meditating saints. That son of a sinful mind who abandons his parents who are maimed, helpless, old, or are suffering from a serious disease, obtains (i.e. goes to) a terrible hell, full of worms.

6b-22. I shall now tell you about the sin of (i.e. committed by) a son, who, when called by his old parents, does not go (to them). There is no doubt that the fool becomes the eater of feces and a village-pig; and then again he is born as a dog for (the next) thousand existences. That son, who, without feeding his old mother and father living in his house, himself eats (i.e. eats alone), would eat (i.e. drink) urine, (and eat) feces for a thousand existences. The sinner would be (born) as a black serpent for two hundred existences. He, the sinner, who goes forward by neglecting his old mother or father, is born as a shark for crores of existences. That sinful son, who censures them with bitter words, would be (born as) a tiger and then would be born as a bear. That wicked-minded son who would not worship his mother or father would dwell in (the hell called) Kumbhīpāka for as long as a (period covered by) a thousand yugas. For a son there is no other holy place, that would emancipate him and would cause his well-being here and in the next world, like his mother or like his father. Therefore, O you very intelligent one, I worship the deity in the form of my father (and) the deity in the form of my mother. I have by that become a devotee devoted to all gods. Excellent knowledge is produced (in me) due to the grace of my mother and father. Which wise man does not worship his mother or father? O brāhmaṇa, what is the use of his having studied the Vedas, with the Aṅgas and the Upāṅgas, and along with scriptures and (other) branches of knowledge, who has not honoured his father? The Vedas are useless for him who has not honoured his mother. Also, O brāhmaṇa, what is the use of sacrifices, penance, (giving) gifts and worships (of deities)? (All this) becomes fruitless (in the case) of him, who, while living (as a householder) in his house, has not worshipped his mother and has not worshipped his father. This (i.e. honouring his parents) alone is the duty of a son; this (alone) is a holy place among (i.e. for) men. This alone is the final beatitude of a son; similarly (this alone) is the auspicious fruit of his existence. This (alone) is the sacrifice of (i.e. performed by) a son. There is no doubt about it.

23-29. Intent on worshipping the father (and the mother, a son) who everyday devoutly worships his father (and mother), has all that has been said before. He, who has worshipped his mother also, has undoubtedly obtained the fruit of giving gifts, or of (visiting) a holy place, or of (performing) a sacrifice. All the acts giving merit, like sacrifices etc., are well accomplished by him who has everyday worshipped his father with good (i.e. great) devotion. For this only I have studied and learnt the science of religious merit. O Pippala, a son should always be intensely devoted to his father. Formerly, king Yadu obtained happiness when his father was pleased; (and) listen, how formerly when the father was angry, Ruru, a Paurava (king), obtained great sin on the earth, when cursed by his father. When I served these two (i.e. my parents) I got knowledge like this. By the grace of these I obtained an excellent fruit.


