+++
title = "068  The Fruit of Righteous Deeds"

+++
 

## *Yayāti said*:

l\. O charioteer, O lord, I have heard everything about the fruit of unrighteousness. Tell me also about the fruit of righteousness. I have a curiosity to hear it.

## *Mātali said*:

2-12. These four kinds of all the embodied ones, being helpless, go to Yama’s world which causes fear and which is terrible, due to their sins. All beings, that remain in the womb, that are born, and children, young men, middle-aged men, old men, men, women and eunuchs have to go (to Yama’s world). There the auspicious or inauspicious fruit (of the deeds) of human beings is decided by all like impartial and omniscient Citragupta and others. There are no beings (in the world) that do not go to Yama’s abode. (The fruit of) the deed done (by a being) has to be enjoyed as decided by them. Those men, who do auspicious deeds, who have soft hearts, who are endowed with pity, go to Yama’s abode along a pleasing path. A man who would give (i.e. who gives) shoes, wood or sandals to brāhmaṇas, happily goes to Yama’s abode in a great aeroplane. By giving umbrellas (as gifts to brāhmaṇa) human beings go (to Yama’s abode). By giving a palanquin (as a gift to a brāhmaṇa) one would happily go (to Yama’s abode) along a path in the sky. Those who give garments (as gifts to brāhmaṇas), go, wearing divine garments (to Yama’s abode). By giving a palanquin (as a gift to a brāhmaṇa) one would happily go (to Yama’s abode) in an aeroplane. By giving a comfortable seat (to a brāhmaṇa) (human beings) happily go to Yama’s abode. One who has constructed groves would go happily (enjoying) very cool shadows. Those who give gardens (with trees full of) flowers go to Yama’s abode in the Puṣpaka aeroplane. He, who builds a temple, or a hermitage for ascetics, or pavilions for the helpless, playfully goes, due to (having constructed) best dwellings (to Yama’s abode). So also he, who worships deities, fire, preceptors, brāhmaṇas, and his father and mother, (playfully goes to Yama’s abode).

13-17. All that, even though little, which is given with faith to helpless, virtuous brāhmaṇas obtains (i.e. secures for him) all the desired objects. The saints say that in the world gifts (should be given) at a śrāddha. It should be realized that whatever—even of the measure of that which remains on the tip of a hair—is given with faith (gives good fruit); I always rely upon the four recipients (at a śrāddha). Therefore (if) one always has faith, the fruit of faith would be (obtained) by him. O king, he, who gives dwellings to the virtuous (but) helpless brāhmaṇas, goes to the abode of the grandsire, which satisfies all his desires. O king, he who has given with faith, (something even) of the size of a cowrie to a brāhmaṇa, would be a divine guest, enhancing the glory of gods. Therefore, those, who have faith, should give (i.e. human beings should give with faith). There is certainly (obtained) the fruit of that.


