+++
title = "073  The Efficacy of Viṣṇu’s Name"

+++
 

## *Pippala said*:

1\. When that illustrious messenger had left (for heaven), what did that religious-minded Yayāti, the son of Nahuṣa, do?

## *Sukarman said*:

2-7. When that messenger of the best god (i.e. Indra) had left, the son of king (Nahuṣa) thought (to himself). Having immediately called his excellent messengers, he instructed them with words of propriety: “The excellent messengers should go to an excellent city, to all regions and islands in the world. They should carry out my words (i.e. order) which is full of virtue. May people go along the good path of Viṣṇu, by means of devotional and very meritorious (acts), meditations resembling nectar, knowledge, sacrifices and austerities. Abandoning the worldly objects of sense, may they worship Viṣṇu alone with sacrifices and gifts. May they see only the enemy of the demons and of the nature of the soul everywhere—at dry places, wet and immobile places, in the clouds, on the earth, in mobile and immobile (objects) and even in their own bodies. With hospitality and rites in honour of their dead ancestors may they offer gifts dedicating them to that god. May they offer sacrifices to that best god Nārāyaṇa (i.e. Viṣṇu); you (i.e. they) will soon be free from blemishes. That shameless man who through greed or folly would not obey these words of me right now, would certainly be punished like a vile thief.”

8\. Having heard the words of the king, the messengers, with their minds delighted, (moved over) the entire earth, and made the order given by the king known among all the subjects.

9-16. “O mortals, brāhmaṇas and others, the king has brought on the earth the very meritorious nectar. Drink that meritorious (nectar) called Vaiṣṇava, free from blemishes and of a desirable effect. The king has already brought (to the earth) the nectar, removing blemishes, in the form of the name Śrī Keśava, which removes suffering, which is desirable, which is of the form of joy, and which itself is the highest truth. May people drink it. The good king has already brought (to the earth) the nectar, removing blemishes, in the form of the name of him, holding a sword in his hand, called Madhusūdana, the abode of Lakṣmī, and the meritorious lord of the gods. May people drink it. The good king has already brought (to the earth) nectar, removing blemishes, in the form of the name Śrī Padmanābha, of lotus-like eyes, the prop of the worlds, and the great lord. May the people drink it. The good king has already brought the nectar, removing blemishes, in the form of (Viṣṇu’s) name, which destroys sins, which removes diseases, which gives joy, which destroys the dānavas and daityas (i.e. the demons). May people drink it. The good king has already brought the nectar, removing blemishes, in' the form of the name Viṣṇu of the nature of sacrificial requisites, with a disc in his hand, the mine of religious merit, and of infinite happiness. May people drink it. The king has already brought the nectar, removing blemishes, in the form of the name of Viṣṇu, the abode of everything, pure, the end (of everything), named Rāma, the pleasing, and the enemy of Mura. May people drink it. The good king has already brought the nectar, removing blemishes, in the form of the name of (Viṣṇu), of the form of the sun, the destroyer of darkness, the destroyer of the bond of the lotuses in the form of minds. May people drink it.

17\. He, the noble one, Viṣṇu’s devotee, having restrained himself, studies (i.e. recites) this truthful, very meritorious nectar of (Viṣṇu’s) name, goes to salvation. There is no (other) agent (than it).”


