+++
title = "075  Yayāti’s Subjects became Deathless by the Grace of Viṣṇu"

+++
 

## *Sukarman said*:

1-6. All men, children, old people, unmarried girls always uttered names (i.e. recited the various names of Viṣṇu like) Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa, Hari, Rāma, Mukunda, Madhusūdaṇa, Nārāyaṇa of the form of Viṣṇu, Narasiṃha, Acyuta, Keśava, Padmanābha, Vāsudeva, Vāmana, Varāha, Kamaṭha, Matsya, Hṛṣīkeśa, Surādhipa, Viśveśa, Viśvarūpa, Ananta, Anagha, Śuci, Puruṣa, Puṣkarākṣa, Śrīdhara, Śrīpati, Hari, Śrīnivāsa, Pītavāsa (i.e. clad in a yellow garment), Mādhava, Mokṣada (i.e. giver of salvation) and Prabhu. Women, engaged in domestic work always profusely sang (i.e. recited the names of) Hari, Mādhava, (so also when they were seated) on a seat, (when they were lying) in bed, (while they were going) in a vehicle and in meditation. Similarly children (while) playiṇg saluted Govinda (i.e. Viṣṇu).

7-16. Day and nigḥt they uttered the very sweet name of Viṣṇu. O best brāhmaṇa, everywhere the utterance (of the name) of Viṣṇu was heard. Human beings lived on the earth (only) through the power of Viṣṇu. Discs (of Viṣṇu) shoṇe as the (reflections of the). discs of the suṇ shine on the tops of the pitchers of palaces and temples. That condition which was seen in Vaikuṇṭha was seen oṇ the earth. That noble king, Nahuṣa’s son Yayāti, performed (acts of) merit, and made the earth resemble Viṣṇu’s heaven. The appearance of both the worlds (being similar) the earth had become one (with Viṣṇu’s heaven). No difference between the earth aṇd Viṣṇu’s heaveṇ was noticed. As the devotees ofViṣṇu uttered the names of Viṣṇu in Vaikuṇṭha, like that (i.e. in the same way) men uttered Viṣṇu’s names on the earth. O brāhmaṇa, identity between the two worlds was noticed. There was no fear from old age and diseases. People were free from death. On the earth greater grandeur of charity and enjoyment was seen. O best one, men happily enjoyed greater pleasure of (i.e. from) soṇs aṇd grand-sons. All the human beings—Viṣṇu’s devotees—were always free from all diseases due to the gift of Viṣṇu’s grace (which they received) and his instruction.

17-20a. The king brought about the grandeur of heaven on the earth. O best king, the years were of the extent of twenty-five (i.e. were very long). All men were free from diseases and were iṇtent upon (getting) knowledge and meditation. All men were solely absorbed in (performing) sacrifices, and (giving) gifts, and all were kind. They were engaged iṇ obliging (others); those meritorious men, repositories of fame, were blessed. O brāhmaṇa, all men were solely devoted to religion and were solely absorbed in meditation. Instructed by that king, they became devoted to Viṣṇu on the earth.

## *Viṣṇu said*:

20b-28a. O best king, listen to the account of that king. That son of Nahuṣa was always absorbed in all (deeds of) merit and a devotee of Viṣṇu. In this way he passed a lakh of years on the earth. His. body endowed with maturity, appeared to be twenty-five years old by means of his (handsome) form. Those men (i.e. his subjects), having resorted to (i.e. living on) the earth, do not at all go to Yama. O king, all people free from attachment and hatred, bereft of the noose of suffering, happy on account of the merit (obtained) by (giving) gifts, and solely devoted to all religious deeds, always expanded (i.e. their number grew) with regard to progeny also. As the dūrvā (grass) and the bunyan trees spread on the earth, in the same way all those men expanded (i.e. grew in number) by means of sons and grandsons. Those men, free from the blemish of death, lived long. All (those) men with strong bodies, free from old age and diseases and (therefore) happy, were seen to be twenty-five years old (i.e. very young) on the earth. All were devoted to good conduct and absorbed in meditation on Viṣṇu.

28b-34a. Thus all mortals—all human beings—had become solely devoted to (giving) gifts and enjoyments, due to the grace of that disc-holder (i.e. Viṣṇu). O best man, no human being was heard to be dead. They did not see (i.e. meet with) grief, nor did. they go to (i.e. have) blemish. O best of men, due to the favour of that disc-holder, the nature of the world had become just like that which was the nature of heaven. The messengers of Yama, beaten by Viṣṇu’s messengers, disappeared. All of them, weeping with one another, went to Dharmarāja (i.e. Yama). The messengers told (Yama) all that the king (i.e. Yayāti) had done. (They said to Yama): “O Sun’s son; due to (giving of) gifts and enjoyment the earth has become deathless. O god, Yayāti, the son of Nahuṣa, did it. That meritorious devotee of Viṣṇu, demonstrated the nature of heaven (on the earth).”

34b-35. At that time Dharmarāja heard all this. Then Dharmarāja, having heard in detail the activities of the king, considered the entire fact.


