+++
title = "076  Dharmarāja Rendered Jobless"

+++
 

## *Sukarman said*:

1-4a. The son of the Sun (i.e. Yama) went with all his messengers to heaven to see there Indra, surrounded by groups of gods. Then that king of gods (i.e. Indra) saw Dharmarāja in his assembly. Quickly getting up he presented excellent respectful offering to him, and asked him (the reason for) his arrival (saying:) “Tell me (why you have come).” Hearing the weighty words uttered by the king of gods, Dharmarāja narrated (to him) all the great account of Yayāti.

## *Dharmarāja said*:

4b-11. O lord of gods, listen what for I have come. I will here only (i.e. just now) tell (you) why I have come. The noble son of Nahuṣa, the devotee of Viṣṇu, has made all human beings that live on the earth the devotees of Viṣṇu. He has made the nature of the mortal world like that of Vaikuṇṭha. Human beings have become immortal and free from old age and diseases. They just do not commit a sin, nor do they tell a lie. They are free from lust and wrath, and are without greed and delusion. The noble ones are given to charity and all of them are devoted to religion. With all good works they worship sound Nārāyaṇa. Due to (the practice of) that Vaiṣṇava religion all men on the earth are healthy, free from grief, and all have a steady youth. O god, as the Dūrvā (grass) and the bunyan trees spread on the earth, in the same way they have expanded (i.e. grown in number) due to their sons, grandsons and great-grandsons. With their sons and great-grandsons they have gone from one dynasty to another (i.e. have started various dynasties).

12-15a. Thus that son of Nahuṣa has made the entire mortal world the devotee of Viṣṇu and free from old age and death. Being free from (i.e. having no) function I have (as though) become deprived of my position. I have thus told you everything that puts an end to my job. Knowing thus, O thousand-eyed (Indra), do what is beneficial to this world. I have told you all this as I was asked by you. For this reason, O Indra, I have come into your proximity (i.e. to you).

## *Indra said*:

15b-18a. O great Dharmarāja, formerly only I had sent my messenger (i.e. Mātali) for coming over of that noble one (i.e. to bring here that noble Yayāti). Even my messenger spoke to him. (But Yayāti said to him:) “I do not desire the pleasures in heaven. I shall not (at all) come to heaven. I shall make the entire globe of the nature of heaven.” Thus the king told (my messenger). He is protecting his subjects. Due to the power of his righteousness I always remain imperiled.

## *Dharma said*:

18b-19a. O illustrious lord of gods, if you desire what is dear to me, then bring that good king (to heaven) by any means.

19b-22a. O king, having heard these words of that Dharmarāja, the intelligent lord of gods considered everything from a factual point of view. God Indra of a noble mind, having called Cupid and Gandharvas, brought Cuckoo and Rati. (He told them:) “Do that by which the king will come (here). Ordered by me you should go to the earth. (There should be) no hesitation (about it).”

## *Kāma (i.e. Cupid) said*:

22b-23a. There is no doubt that I shall do what is agreeable and favourable to you. See me and the king standing (opposite each other) in a battle.

23b-24. Saying, ‘All right’, all went there where that king, Nahuṣa’s son, was. O brāhmaṇa, all of them, Kāma and others, in the form of actors (i.e. having disguised themselves) greeted the king with blessings and related their good drama (i.e. with good acting spoke to him).

25-33. Having heard those words of them, the intelligent lord of the earth, Yayāti, arranged a divine assembly, with very learned men. The king, proficient in sacred and profane knowledge, himself came (there). That king, the son of Nahuṣa, saw that drama. (He saw) the life of Vāmana, also his birth as a brāhmaṇa. At that time Jarā (i.e. old age), in the form of a woman matchless in beauty in the world, sang an excellent, melodious, song, O king. Due to the charm of her singing and due to her graceful laughter (i.e. smile), and on account of her sweet words, and due to the device, manner and divine behaviour of Cupid he was deluded. Cupid had a form as that of Bali, or of the row of Vindhya or of Vāmana, formerly. Cupid himself became the principal actor and the stage manager, and Spring was his assistant. That Rati, whose husband was delighted, put on the apparel of the chief actress. In that dance-performance she moved in the retiring room. The very intelligent Cuckoo excited the king. As the glorious king saw the excellent dance and listened to the excellent music he was deluded by (these) presented by the chief actress (i.e. Rati).


