+++
title = "078  Pūru Gives His Youth to Yayāti"

+++
 

## *Yayāti said*:

1-4. O my noble sons, the wise one among you should take this my old age which is giving me pain, and should give his own youth and excellent form (to me); (so that) I shall behave as I like. Today my very fickle mind is inflamed, and is attached to a woman. As fire whirls round the water in a pot, similarly, O (my) sons, my mind is very much shaken by the fire of passion. O (my) sons, one (of you) should take this my old age which is giving me pain, and should give (me) his youth; (so that) I shall behave according to my will.

5-6. He, the best son, who passes on his youth to me, will enjoy my kingdom, and will wield my bow (and carry on) my line. He will have happiness, ample wealth, riches and grains. He will have many children and glory and fame.

## *The sons said*:

7\. O king, you are a king who are devoted to religion. You are guarding your subjects truthfully. Due to what has this idea, naturally fickle, arisen in you?

## *The king said*:

8-10. Formerly dancers, superior dancers, came to my city. Due to them such delusion has arisen in me, when Cupid had allured me. My body is covered with old age; and my mind was overcome with Cupid (i.e. passion). O best sons, I was srnit and overcome by passion. I saw a beautiful maiden of a divine form. O sons, I spoke to her; but the good one did not say anything.

11-13. Her charming and clever friend is Viśālā by name. She spoke good words to me, giving me joy: “When you would be free from old age, the very dear one will be yours.” I accepted (i.e. agreed to) these words spoken by her, and (then) came home. To get rid of my old age, I have thus told you that (she had told me). O good sons, realizing thus, you should do (what gives) me pleasure.

14-18. By the favour of the father and the mother, body is obtained by sons. O king, with the (help of the) body religious acts are done by a wise man. A son should especially serve his father. Yet, O king, this is not the time for me to give my youth (to you). O king, men should enjoy the pleasures of senses in youth. Now it is not properly the time for you (to enjoy these pleasures). (You say) O father, that pleasure would be enjoyed by you after you give your ripe old age to your sons; but (then) you would not have (that much) life (i.e. you would not live that long). Therefore, O great king, I shall not do your words (i.e. do as you say).

In this way the eldest son, Turu, spoke to him at that time.

19\. Hearing those words of Turu, the king became angry. The pious one, with his eyes red with anger, cursed Turu.

20-26. “O you of a wicked heart, you have disobeyed this order of mine. Therefore, be a sinful person outcast by all religions. You will be without the lock of hair on the crown of the head; you will be deprived of the sacred texts; you will be without all manners. There is no doubt about this. You will be the killer of brāhmaṇas; you will be ruined by gods; you will be a drunkard; you will be without truthfulness; you will do fierce deeds; you will be the meanest man. You will be addicted to drinking; you. will be hungry, sinful and a killer of cows. Your skin will be bad; you will have the hem of your lower garment untucked; you will hate brāhmaṇas; you will be deformed. You will be an adulterer; you will be very fierce; you will be very lustful; you will eat everything; you will always be wicked. You will have sexual intercourse with a woman of your own kin; you will destroy all religious practices; you will be without sacred knowledge; and you will suffer from leprosy. Your sons and grandsons also will destroy all holy objects, will be barbarians, and will be very much spoilt like this (i.e. in the same way).”

27\. Having thus cursed Turu very badly, he spoke to (his other) son, Yadu: “Take on (my) old age now, and enjoy the kingdom free from any source of vexation.”

28a. Joining the palms of his hands, Yadu said to the king:

## *Yadu said*:

28b-30. O father, I am unable to bear the burden of (your) old age; (please) be kind to (i.e. excuse) me. There are five causes of old age: frigidity, journey, bad food, aged woman, and disinclination of the mind. O king, I am not able (to put up with) the misery in my youth (i.e. while I am young). Who is able to hold (up old age)? Now (please) excuse me.

31-32. O son of a brāhmaṇa, the angry great king cursed Yadu: “Your lineage shall never deserve a kingdom. It will be without power, lustre, forbearance, and will be deprived of the practices of kṣatriyas (since you have) turned (your) back upon my order. There is no uncertainty about it.”

## *Yadu said*:

33\. O great king, I am faultless; why have you now cursed me? (Please) favour the poor one (i.e. me). Be pleased to favour me.

## *The king said*:

34\. O son, (when) the great god will take birth with his portion in your family, then your family will be purified.

## *Yadu said*:

35\. O great king, you have cursed me, your son, who am faultless; If you have compassion for me, (please) favour me.

## *The king said*:

36\. He who is the eldest son should remove the misery of the father. He well enjoys the inheritance of the kingdom, and he would bear the burden (of the kingdom).

37-38a. You have not done (your) duty, (therefore) you are certainly not fit to be talked to. You have destroyed (i.e. disobeyed) the order of me who (can) strike with a great (i.e. heavy) punishment. Therefore you cannot be favoured, do as you please.

## *Yadu said*:

38b-42a. O king, since you have destroyed my kingdom, form and family, therefore, I, the chief of your family, will be wicked. In your family will be (born) kṣatriyas of various forms. There is no doubt that very fierce and very mighty (beings) will enjoy their villages, good regions, their women, and whatever gems they will have. From my family (will) be born Turuṣkas of the form of barbarians—those who were destroyed and who were cursed by you with very fierce curses. O best king, the angry Yadu thus spoke to the king (Yayāti).

42b-45. Then the angry great king again cursed (Yadu) thus: “Listen, know all that will be born in your family will ruin my subjects. As long as the moon, the sun, the earth, the constellations and the stars (last) the mlecchas will be roasted in the Kumbhīpāka and the Raurava (hells).” Then seeing the young Kuru playing, and possessed of good marks, the king did not call that son (of him) a prince. Knowing Kuru to be a child, the king left then.

46-47a. Then the lord of the world (i.e. Yayāti) called Pūru, the meritorious son of Śarmiṣṭhā, and said to him: “Take my old age and enjoy my extremely good kingdom, with the sources of nuisance eradicated, (and) given by me (to you).”

## *Pūru* *said*:

47b-49a. The lord (if you) should enjoy the kingdom as was enjoyed by your father, I shall obey your order. O king, give me your old age in exchange for my youth. Today only appearing handsome, enjoy, with your mind attached to objects of sense, pleasures and good deeds.

49b-54a. O noble one, sport with her as long as you desire. O father, as long as I live I shall keep up old age.

Thus addressed by that Pūru, the lord of the world, with his heart full of great joy, said again to his son: “O child, since you did not disobey my order, (on the contrary) obeyed it, therefore I shall give you much happiness. O you very intelligent one, since you took my old age, and gave me your own youth, therefore you enjoy the kingdom given by me.” O king, that good Pūru, thus addressed by that king, gave him his youth and took old age from him.

54b-60a. When, O dear one, the exchange of the ages of the father and the son was effected, Pūru appeared to be older than the king in all his limbs. The king reached youth, (and looked like a man) sixteen years old, and possessing great charm (looked) as it were he was another Cupid. The great king gave that noble Pūru everything—(his) bow, kingdom, umbrella, fan, seat, and elephant, (so also) his entire treasure, country, army, chowrie and also the chariot. That Nahuṣa’s righteous son, attached to passion, thinking of that maiden, went with quick steps, to that lake known as Kāma, and resembling an ocean, where Aśrubindumatī (stayed). Seeing that eminent maiden of large eyes and having beautiful and plump breasts, the great king, with his mind attracted by Cupid, said to Viśālā:

## *The* *king said*:

60b-62a. O you noble and eminent one of charming eyes, I have, O auspicious one, given up my old age, and (now) endowed with youth. Becoming a young man, I have come (here). Let her be mine now. There is no doubt that I shall give her whatever she desires.

## *Viśālā said*:

62b-63a. When (now) you have come after having abandoned the wicked old age, (yet) you are still covered by one blemish. (Therefore) she does not prize you.

## *The* *king said*:

63b-64. If you definitely know my blemish then tell it (to me). I shall certainly abandon that blemish of an inferior nature.


