+++
title = "082  Yayāti Takes Back His Old Age"

+++
 

## *Sukarman said*:

1-8. When the king was thus absorbed in thinking, that beautiful daughter of Rati said: “O you very intelligent king, what do you think just now? There is no doubt that mostly women are fickle. I am not leading you away through fickleness. I am not making use of a fraudulent expedient today, O best king, (by speaking) as other greedy women speak, something that cannot be done, through greed and delusion. A strong desire to see all the worlds is produced in my heart. Seeing deities is meritorious, and is very difficult to be had even by good men. Say to me, O king, that you will cause (i.e. help) me to see the deities. Like another ordinary man, afraid of a great misery and fallen into the ditch of delusion, you are thinking if there would be a great sin due to my company now. Give up your anxiety; you should not go to heaven. I shall never do that which gives you pain.”

9-11. The king, thus addressed (by her), said to that beautiful woman: “O respectable lady, now listen to what I have thought out. I see (here) insult, and not the (satisfying of) my mind. O beloved, when I go to the heaven, my subjects will be helpless. The wicked-minded Yama will trouble my subjects with diseases. O beautiful one, I shall go to heaven with you.”

12-26. Having thus spoken to her and having called his best son Pūru, possessing old age and of a great intelligence (he said to him:) “Come on, O you who know all the customary observances, you certainly know your duty. O you religious-minded one, you have preserved piety by my order. O son, give me (my) old age back, and take back (your) youth. Protect this kingdom of mine along with the treasure, army and vehicles. Enjoy the earth full of gems, along with villages, forests and cities given (to you) by me. O sinless one, you should do the protection of the subjects which is meritorious; on the authority of the sacred texts you should always punish the wicked and protect the good. O glorious one, you should protect the brāhmaṇas by your deeds devoutly and according to the rules, since they are worthy of respect in the three worlds. Every fifth or seventh day inspect the treasure and meet the learned. You should always honour your army by favouring them and giving them wealth and food. Always use your spies as your eyes, and always be engaged in charity. Always be restrained in your consultation, since it is always to be guarded by very wise men. O son, always control yourself; do not go ahunting. Do not trust anybody—women, treasure or your great army. Always collect worthy persons and all arts. Worship Viṣṇu with sacrifices, and always be virtuous. Everyday crush the sources of nuisance among the subjects. Everyday give your subjects all that is desired by them. Give happiness to the subjects, support the subjects, O son. Have (sexual union with a woman) in your own family (only); do not have it with someone else’s wife. Do not think ill about other’s wealth; always follow your forefathers. Always ponder over the Vedas and the sacred texts; O child, be engaged in the study of (the science of handling) weapons. O child, always be contented, and be devoted to your own bed (i.e. wife). Always study elephants, horses and chariots.”

27-28. Having thus instructed his son, having congratulated him with blessings, having put him (on the throne) with his own hand, he gave his weapon into his hand. Then Yayāti, the lord of the earth, having taken (back) from (Pūru) his old age, gave him (his youth) and desired to go to heaven.


