+++
title = "084  Glorification of Devotion to Parents"

+++
 

## *Sukarman said*:

1-10. I have narrated to you this entire account, which removes sins, which emancipates sons, which is divine, and which gives great religious merit. The well-known deeds of Yayāti are actually seen in the world. Pūru obtained the great kingdom as it was brought into existence, and Turu was reduced to a bad plight, due (respectively) to the father’s favour and anger. It emancipates sons, gives glory and wealth and grains. Both Turu and Yadu were under the influence of a curse. There is no other giver of desirable fruits like the father or the mother. A father may call his son through love, and a mother (may call him saying:) ‘O son, O son.’ Listen to its meritorious fruit. When a son, who is called by his mother, goes to her with affection, he would get the fruit of having bathed in the Ganges. A very glorious son, who would wash the feet (of his parents) enjoys, through their grace, the fruit of (having visited) all the sacred places; and by shampooing their bodies he would obtain the fruit of a horse-sacrifice. In that son, who would nourish his father (and mother) with food, covering, and bath, merit equal to that obtained by the gift of the earth is produced. The Ganges is full of (the merit of) all sacred places. A mother is like that (only). There is no doubt about it. The ancient poets know that as the ocean is established as full of much merit, similarly is the father in this world.

## *Sukarman said*:

11-19a. That son, who abandons or yells at his father or mother, undoubtedly goes to the hell called Raurava. That son, who, being a householder, does not support his old mother or father, goes to hell and would certainly meet with agony. For a wicked-minded and sinful son, who abuses his father (or mother), the ancient poets have never known any requital. O brāhmaṇa, knowing thus I am everyday worshipping devoutly and with my neck (i.e. head) bent my mother and father. My father, calling me, would tell me what ought and what ought not to be done. I do it with discrimination and according to my strength, O Pippala. Due to that I have obtained the highest knowledge giving me happiness. A man lives in the mundane existence due to the favour of these two (i.e. the parents). I know whatever men remaining on the earth do and when a householder proceeds to heaven. O Pippala, even while being here I know the movement of cruel persons. O best of the Vidyādharas, the three worlds have come under my sway. You should (please) worship Mādhava (i.e. Viṣṇu).

## *Viṣṇu said*:

19b-21. Pippala, thus directed by him, having bowed down to the best brāhmaṇa, and also being ashamed, went to heaven in accordance with (the fruit of) his deeds. O king, that Sukarman of a religious mind, also served his father (and mother). I have thus told you everything pertaining to the holy place (in the form) of the father (and mother). O very intelligent Vena, tell me what else I should tell you.


