+++
title = "088  Divyādevī Goes to Viṣṇu’s Heaven"

+++
 

## *Kuñjala said*:

1-4a. O good son, I have told you the vow, the hymn, the great knowledge and the meditation of Viṣṇu which destroy sins. When she (i.e. Divyādevī) would practise these auspicious four, she will go to Viṣṇu’s world, difficult to be obtained even by gods. O child, going from here, teach the vow to Divyādevī. Tell (i.e. teach) her the king of vows called Aśūnya-śayana. Emanicipate the glorious princess from a great sin. You asked me (and therefore) I told (you about the vow) giving religious merit and destroying sins. O glorious one, go, (do) go.

Saying so, he ceased (to speak).

## *Śrī Viṣṇu said*:

4b-10. That religious-minded and very intelligent Ujjvala, thus addressed by his father, having saluted the feet of his mother and father, quickly went to Plakṣadvīpa. He went to that mountain, auspicious on all sides, full of various minerals, and adorned with lofty peaks full of many kinds of jewels. O king, there were rivers with clean water flowing in many streams on that excellent mountain. O king, Kinnaras and Gandharvas sang there melodiously. It was crowded with the celestial nymphs; it was filled with hosts of gods; it was ringing with Siddhas and Cāraṇas; it was adorned with groups of sages. It was everywhere resounding with the notes of various birds.

11-13. The bright and quick-footed one thus reached that mountain. That woman also was weeping meodiously on that mountain. The wise one said (these) words to her who was again and again weeping. “O auspicious one, who are you? Why are you weeping now? Whom had you resorted to? Who has harmed you? Today only tell me the entire cause of your grief.”

## *Divyādevī said*:

14-18. O glorious one, it is properly the fruit of my deeds. Being widowed I staying here unhappily. O you illustrious one, who are you, afflicted by my grief?

O child, he, who had taken the form of a bird, having heard all that the princess had said, spoke enthusiastically, O child: “O glorious one, I am a bird, afflicted by your grief. I have taken the form of a bird, (but) I am neither a Siddha, nor a wise person. I saw you weeping here very loudly; therefore, O respectable lady, I am asking you. Tell me its cause, what happened in your father’s house, and your own account.”

19-24a. In brief and in proper order, she told everything that pained her. Having heard that, that large-hearted, great bird Ujjvala said to that Divyādevī who was very much pained: “At the time of your marriage your grooms died, the kṣatriyas also perished due to your self-choice marriage. O you lady of beautiful eyes, through compassion for you, my father told me the sinful deeds you had done in the other (i.e. former) existence. O you beautiful lady, strengthened by that blemish you are covered with that. Eat the fruit of the deeds you did in the previous birth. Be composed.”

24b-27. That young humble lady, having heard those words of Ujjvala, replied to that magnanimous bird, who (thus) spoke (in human voice) in piteous words: “O bird, favour me. With (i.e. showing) grace, tell (me about) the atonement of that sin; also (tell me about) the expiation which will purify my sins, by which, being pure due to my sins washed, I shall go to a holy (place). Be -gracious, and tell me about the expiation, O you glorious one.”

## *Ujjvala said*:

28-31. O you glorious one, for you only I asked my father. Then my father told (me) about matchless expiation. O you illustrious one, you do that which would purify all your sins. Meditate upon Hṛṣīkeśa (i.e. Viṣṇu), mutter his hundred names. Be intent upon (obtaining) knowledge. Always practise the excellent, holy vow (called) ‘Aśūnyaśayana’ which destroys sins.

The religious-minded one explained to her knowledge, hymn, vow of and meditation upon the noble Viṣṇu, which reveals all knowledge.

## *Viṣṇu said:*

32-35. Remaining in the solitary forest, she took it from him. She became free from all pairs of opposites and remained in penance. O great king, controlling her food, helpless and very much afflicted, free from lust and anger, and always controlling the group of the organs of sense and having abandoned great delusion, she practised the vow. When the fourth year came, the excellent lord Janārdana (i.e. Viṣṇu) who was very much pleased came there with a desire to grant her a boon. The lord, the giver of boons, manifested his form to her.

## *Sūta said*:

36-42a. She, joining the palms of her hands, trembling and helpless, spoke in a faltering tone, after saluting Madhusūdana (i.e. Viṣṇu), the great lord, dark-green like a sapphire and a cloud, holding a conch, a disc and a mace, rich with charm due to all ornaments, having a lotus in his hand: “I am not at all able to stand your divine lustre. Be gracious and please tell me who you, of a divine form, are and what is the cause (of) your (coming over} here? With favour (i.e. favour me) and tell me everything, O highly intelligent one. Due to your lustre and gestures I know (i.e. I think) you are just a god. O lord of the world, I, who am ignorant, do not know your form and name. Are you Brahmā, or Viṣṇu or Śaṅkara himself?” Speaking like this, and bowing to him she fell (i.e. prostrated herself) on the ground like a staff. Viṣṇu spoke to that princess who had bent before him.

## *The lord said*:

42b-46a. O you auspicious one, there is no difference among the three. O you beautiful lady, I am always worshipped by him who has worshipped Brahmā or Śaṅkara. No doubt should be raised about it. These two are not different from me. I always have these three forms. Those who worship me, worship well these two. I am god Viṣṇu, who has come here through pity for you and due to the hymn and this auspicious vow and your restraint. You have become free from blemishes. O you auspicious one, ask for a boon.

## *Divyādevī said*:

46b-49a. O Viṣṇu, O Kṛṣṇa the remover of affliction, be victorious. I am saluting your couple of feet. O lord of gods, emancipate me. O you having the disc in your hand, you desire to grant me a boon. Be gracious to me. O you sinless one, give (i.e. create in) me devotion for the couple of your feet. O lord of the world, show (me) the sound path to salvation. If, O Janārdana, you are pleased, give me the status of your servant (i.e. make me your servant).

## *The* *Lord said*:

49b-54. O you noble one, let it be so. Go, with your sins completely washed, to Viṣṇu’s highest heaven, always difficult to be obtained (even) by meditating saints. Now, due to my grace, do go to the highest world.

When the magnanimous Viṣṇu uttered these words, Divyādevī became divine with her lustre resembling that of the sun. She, adorned with divine ornaments, with a divine garland, a divine necklace, went, when all the people were watching, to Viṣṇu’s heaven, free from tormentation and destruction. The bird, full ofjoy, again came home. The best one told all that to his father.


