+++
title = "093  Vijvala Narrates His Experience"

+++
 

## *Kuñjala said*:

1-2. O Vijvala, what thing not seen before and full of wonder did you, while wandering on the earth, see? Tell me that, O you of a good vow. O best son, tell me which country did you go to with a strenuous effort for (obtaining) food; (tell me) what wonder you noticed.

## *Vijvala said*:

3-6. On the surface of mountain Meru there is a forest by name Ānanda. It is abounding in divine trees, always full of fruits and flowers; it is crowded with groups of gods, and is attended by sages and siddhas, and also by beautiful celestial damsels, gandharvas, kinnaras and serpents; (it is full of) wells, ponds, lakes, rivers and streams. The holy forest Ānanda shines with divine objects, aeroplanes numbering in crores and resembling swans, kunda flowers and the moon. It is full of the mixed and sweet sounds of songs, and resounds with the thunders of clouds.

7-10. It is everywhere sweet due to the humming of bees. It is covered with sandal trees, mango trees and blossomed campaka trees. In this way that excellent Ānanda forest shines with many trees; and due to the notes of various birds it is full of a mixed sound. There I saw the very beautiful Ānanda forest like this. O father, a clean lake (i.e. lake with clean water) shines like an ocean (in the forest). It is full of auspicious water, and is crowded with auspicious aquatic animals, fragrant with lotuses and is full of swans and ducks.

11-12a. Thus in the centre of the forest there is a lake, adorned with crowds of gods and hosts of sages. It shines well with kinnaras, serpents, gandharvas and bards.

12b-26. O father, there I saw a wonder. It cannot be described. (A man) shone there with a divine aeroplane, shining with an umbrella, a staff and banners and full of all pleasures and with pitchers, O best one. O you of the best vow, he, the shining one, was being praised by gandharvas, celestial nymphs and great sages. (None else) like him was seen; (he was) matchless in form in the world, with his entire body looking charming with ornaments, and round his neck a necklace made of big gems shone. I saw a beautiful lady standing near him. She was (adorned) with golden necklaces and with armlets and bracelets of pearls, and with divine garments and smearings of sandal. The man being praised and sung came there. The lady had the form of Rati, had fine hips, and plump buttocks and breasts. Due to the excellence of her form she was shining like that with ornaments. I saw these two, having the sweetness of form and beauty and endowed with all charm, coming there. The two noble ones—the man and the lady-having lotus-like eyes, got down from the aeroplane, came near the lake, and bathed there, O father. The couple having large weapons seized each other and like them the dead bodies of the two had fallen on the bank of the lake. The dead bodies were like the two—the man and the lady—of lotus-like eyes that were (seen) at Prabhāsa, even in form, O illustrious one. The dead body resembling a godly form, was like the man. The form of it was seen just like him. The other dead body had a form as was (that of) the wife. She then cut off the flesh from the female dead body and ate the (pieces of) flesh covered with blood. The man, being very eager, also ate the flesh of the dead body.

27-33a. The two, oppressed with hunger, ate the flesh of the two (dead bodies). They ate the flesh till they were satisfied. O father, then drinking the water in (i.e. of) the lake, the two became happy. Remaining there for some time they again went by the aeroplane. O father, I also saw there two other females. These two females were endowed with beauty and grace and had pleasing characteristics. When the two (i.e. the husband and the wife) were eating the flesh in the great forest, the two females laughed very loudly. When I was seeing (i.e. in my very presence) the two everyday ate the flesh after taking bath etc. O noble one, the other two females, having terrible forms, with their mouths fearful due to fangs, and very fierce said to them there only: “Give (us), give (us).”

33b-37a. Remaining in the vicinity of the forest I observed like this, O father. The two everyday cut off the flesh and ate it. The bodies of the corpses (i.e. the dead bodies) again became complete. O father, everyday getting down like this, the two and the other (females) acted as I told (you) before, when I was seeing (i.e. in my presence). At that time, O father, I saw the wonder that took place (there). When O father, you asked me (if) I saw a wonder, I told you all that (I saw) which caused doubt.

37b-43. Through grace and with a pleasing heart tell me (about it). O best twice-born, who is that lotus-eyed one, of a divine form, who came with the lady in an aeroplane? And O noble one, who is that lady that ate that large (quantity of) flesh? Who is that (man) and who is that (lady) that came there and ate (the flesh)? Tell us (i.e. me), O father, about the other females that laughed at that time and said: “Give (us), give (us)”. You tell me about these two very fearful females. O father, O you of a good vow, please remove this doubt of me.

Saying so the bird ceased (speaking). That (Kuñjala) thus asked by his third son Vijvala told him all account of Cyavana. So listen (to it).


