+++
title = "099  God Viṣṇu Appears to Subāhu"

+++
 

## *Viṣṇu said*:

1-5. The king, on hearing the hymn which was pure, very ancient, which removed sins, which was full of merit and auspicious, which was blessed, which contained good words, which was greatly fit to be muttered, became happy. His great thirst, along with his hunger, vanished. The lord of the earth became like a god. His wife also shone. Both of them, freed from the bondage of sin, became endowed with good form. That god, the holder of the auspicious conch, disc, lotus, mace and sword, surrounded by great gods, brāhmaṇas, great siddhas full of the devotion of Hari came to the king whose sins had vanished. The holy Nārada, Bhārgava, Vyāsa (came there). The son of Mṛkaṇḍa (also) came there. The sage Vālmīki, Viṣṇu’s devotee, (so also) Vasiṣṭha, the son of Brahmā, came there. The illustrious Garga, full of devotion for Viṣṇu, Jābāli and Raibhya, so also Kaśyapa, (all) dear to Viṣṇu, and best among the followers of Viṣṇu, came there with Viṣṇu.

6-8a. They (who were) meritorious and very blessed, (who were) free from sins, (who were) full of devotion for the lotus-like feet of Hari, stood there, surrounding Hari, and praised the king in various ways. All gods led by Fire, so also Brahma and Hari[^1] and very divine goddesses (came there). Good singers like the gandharva-king sang divinely, sweetly and charmingly. Sages praised him with very auspicious hymns from the Vedas and furnished with the most sublime truth.

[^1]:  Obviously a misprint. It should be Hara (god Śiva).

8b-11. Seeing the lord, the king, god Viṣṇṇ spoke (these) charming words: “O king, ask for the desired boon; I shall grant it to you, since you have pleased me.” The king, hearing the words of Viṣṇu, a blue lotus (in complexion), the destroyer of Mura, the lord holding the conch, disc, sword and mace, the highest lord accompanied by Lakṣmī and bright with gems, adorned with bracelets and necklaces, bright like the sun, well attended upon by gods, well adorned with ornaments like costly necklaces, (with his body) besmeared with very divine sandal (pastes), and talking in front of him, went down to the earth (i.e. prostrated before Viṣṇu) with great devotion.

12-16. The great king constantly saluted (Hari) with prostrations and with the words: “Victory to you. I am your slave, your servanta [servant?], always (standing) before you. I do not know either devotion or best manners. O Hari (i.e. Viṣṇu), protect me, who have, along with my wife, sought your refuge. O Mādhava (i.e. Viṣṇu), those men who are always engrossed in meditation upon you, are blessed. From here they, being extremely pure, and uttering (your names) Bhava, Mādhava, go to Vaikuṇtha. Those men who carry on their head the pure water coming out (i.e. flowing from) your lotuslike feet, have (certainly) bathed in the water coming from all holy places. They go to the good abode of Hari. I do not have deep and abstract meditation. I do not have knowledge. I do not have any exertion. Due to (my) contact with what (kind of) religious merit are you granting me a boon?”

## *Hari said*:

17-18. O king, there is no doubt that you are getting salvation because you heard from the pure and sinless Vijvala, the great sin-destroying (hymn) called Vāsudeva (-hymn). In my world enjoy divine pleasures according to your desire.

## *The king said*:

19\. O god, if I, a poor person, am to be granted a boon, then first give an excellent boon to Vijvala.

## *Hari said*:

20-22. O king, Vijvala’s father Kuñjala, adorned with knowledge, everyday recites the great hymn (in honour) of Vāsudeva. With his sons and wife, he will go to my abode. He always mutters this hymn; (so) I shall give him (its) fruit.

When these auspicious words were said (by Viṣṇu), the king spoke to Keśava (i.e. Viṣṇu): “O Keśava, make this very auspicious hymn fruitful.”

## *Hari said*:

23-30. O great king, when, in the Kṛtayuga, men will praise (me with this hymn), they will undoubtedly go to (i.e. obtain) salvation (just) at that moment. O best king, those men who would mutter this hymn (in honour) of Viṣṇu, leading to salvation, for just three months in Tretāyuga, for six months in Dvāparayuga, and for a year in Kaliyuga, go to heaven. A brāhmaṇa who mutters it thrice or once (a day), gets whatever is desired by him. A kṣatriya, adorned with wealth and grains, gets victory. A viaiśya will be rich; a śūdra will be happy. He who relates this to a man of an inferior tribe, becomes free from sin. The hearer never sees (i.e. goes to) a terrible hell; and due to the grace of my hymn he will have accomplished everything. The manes of him who will recite it (i.e. get it recited) by brāhmaṇas at the time of a śrāddha, will go to Viṣṇu’s heaven after being satisfied. A brāhmaṇa or a kṣatriya should mutter (this hymn) at the end of presenting libations to the manes of the dead ancestors. His manes, with their minds pleased, drink nectar.

31-36a. If a man devoutly mutters this at the time of offering oblations to gods in a sacrifice, no difficulties come up there (i.e. in the sacrifice), and he will accomplish everything. One should utter this hymn in a danger in a difficult place, or in danger from a fierce tiger, or when danger from thieves has come up. O great king, that (danger etc.) will be removed. There is no doubt about it. At other auspicious (times) or when a man has gone, to the gate of a royal palace he mutters (i.e. should mutter) the hymn called Vāsudeva (-hymn) for ten thousand times. Well-bathed, free from anger and greed, with his mind controlled, a man should, with chastity, offer a sacrifice with sesamum-seeds, rice mixed with ghee of the measure of one-tenth (of them), after having worshipped Vāsudeva. Then men should offer a sacrifice to the hymn of praise.

36b. Like a good servant I never leave their side.

37-38a. When Kaliyuga has come (the recital) will give servitude to the hymn (i.e. the hymn will be a servant). It is (i.e.) should not be given to any one indiscriminately for fear of the) violation of (the sacredness of) the Vedas. He will be rich with all his desired objects here (i.e. in this world) only.

38b-42a. O king, listen, I have made this hymn fruitful. It was fashioned (i.e. composed) by Brahmā. Formerly it was muttered by Rudra. He was free from (the sin of) killing a brāhmaṇa. Indra also was free from sin. So also were gods, sages, guhyas (a class of demigods), siddhas, and the immortal vidyādharas. The serpent-demons propitiated the hymn, and obtained the complete attainment as desired by them. The donor, who will mutter my hymn, will be meritorious and blessed here (i.e. in this world). No doubt should be raised in this matter. O best king, come to my abode with your wife.

42b-45. Hari supported the king with his hand. There (at that time) drums (were) sounded; gandharvas sang lovely songs. Best celestial nymphs danced. All gods and sages showered flowers. They praised him with hymns. Then the king, along with his wife, went to Viṣṇu. That Vijvala, with his mind delighted, saw him being praised by hosts of gods and siddhas. He, of a great prowess, came there where his father and mother were.



