+++
title = "100 Vena Asks to Hear More about Kuñjala"

+++
 

## *Viṣṇu said*:

1-8a. (Vijvala’s) father (Kuñjala) lived on a bunyan tree on the beautiful bank of Narmadā. Vijvala too came there, and the very intelligent, religious-minded one narrated to his father the greatness of the hymn called Vāsudeva(-hymn). With a very much pleased mind he told him as to how Viṣṇu came there and gave him (i.e., Subāhu) an auspicious boon. Kuñjala also, having heard the account of that king, was full of great joy, and having embraced his son said: “O child, by narrating the very auspicious (hymn) of Vāsudeva (to the king) you have done a meritorious deed and an obligation to the noble king.” Having thus spoken to his godlike son, having congratulated him with blessings, and having repeatedly praised him, he remained on the beautiful bank of the river, while Cyavana was beholding. O great king, I have told you all this account of those devotees of Viṣṇu. What else should I tell you?

## *Vena said*:

8b-12a. You have given me, through the vessel of a conch, nectar to drink. Therefore, which mortal on the earth will not have a strong desire to drink it? The knowledge about Viṣṇu is always the best drink here (i.e. on the earth). I am not satisfied when it is thus being narrated by you. O lord of gods, my strong desire to hear it increases. Through grace (i.e. be graceful and) tell me about the activities of Kuñjala. What did the noble one say to his fourth son? Please tell that to me in great detail.

## *The lord said*:

12b-14. Listen, I shall tell you Kuñjala’s account, so also Cyavana’s account full of great religious merit. O best of men, this meritorious account destroys sins. The man who devoutly listens to it, would get the fruit of (having performed) a thousand sacrifices.


