+++
title = "104 Indumatī’s Dream"

+++
 

## *Kuñjala said*:

1-4. When that illustrious great sage Dattātreya had left, that great king Āyu came (back) to his own city. Being delighted, he entered Indumatī’s house endowed with glory, rich with all desired objects and resembling Indra’s house. O best brāhmaṇa, like Indra in heaven, the intelligent one ruled with Indumatī, the daughter of Svarbhānu, over his kingdom. By the words of Dattātreya, that queen Indumatī conceived a child endowed with divine lustre as a result of eating the fruit.

5-14. O illustrious one, Indumatī saw, at night accompanied by day (i.e. in the early morning), an excellent dream giving many auspicious objects. (She saw in the dream) a man, who was a brāhmaṇa, resembling the sun, endowed with necklace of pearls, and adorned with a white garment, entering her house. A garland fashioned with white flowers shone round his neck. His body looked charming with all ornaments, and was besmeared with divine sandal (-paste). He had four hands, he had a conch in his hand, and held a mace, a disc and a sword. He, of a great lustre, adorned with divine ornaments, shone with an umbrella, resembling the orb of the moon, which was held (over him). He appeared handsome with a necklace, bracelets, armlets and anklets. He (also) shone with ear-rings resembling the orb of the moon. A very wise man like this came (there). Having called Indumatī, he repeatedly bathed the beautiful lady with milk, with (i.e. from) a conch full of milk and having the colour like that of the moon and decked with gems and gold. He threw (i.e. put) into her mouth a white, beautiful snake, covered with a thousand hoods, endowed with a gem and full of bright flames. On her neck he also put a pearl. That very glorious lord of gods then gave a lotus into Indumatī’s hand and went to his own place.

15\. Like this she saw a great dream and the best son. The illustrious one narrated it to Āyu, the lord of kings.

16-17a. Having heard it, the great king thought again. Then having called his preceptor Śaunaka, the very glorious, omniscient and best among the learned, narrated the best dream to him.

## *The king said*:

17b-18a. O illustrious one, O best brāhmaṇa, today, (late) in the night, my wife saw (in a dream) a brāhmaṇa entering the house. What is the meaning of this dream?

## *Śaunaka said*:

18b-23. Formerly intelligent Dattātreya gave you a boon; and directed (you to give) a very effective fruit to the queen for (obtaining) a son. What have you done with the fruit, O king? To whom have you given it?

Having heard the words uttered by the king, viz. “I have given it to my good wife,” the very intelligent, best brāhmaṇa Śaunaka said: “There is no doubt that, due to Dattātreya’s grace, the best son, possessed of a portion of Viṣṇu will be born in your house. O king, I have told you this meaning of the dream. A son of a divine power, and resembling Indra and Viṣṇu will be born (in your house). Your son will be the soul of all good practices and will perpetuate the lunar dynasty. He will be proficient in the science of archery and the (Ṛg-) Veda (etc.)”.

24\. Having spoken thus to the king, Śaunaka went home. The king, with his wife, was full of great joy.


