+++
title = "106 Indumatī’s Lamentations on the Loss of Her Child"

+++
 

## *Kuñjala said*:

1-2. The glorious wife of Āyu, Svarbhānu’s daughter of an excellent complexion, not seeing that excellent, matchless child, resembling a god, wept, making a loud wailing: “Who has taken away may son of excellent marks, endowed with good characteristics.

3-4. I had obtained the son by penance, charity, sacrifices, and vows difficult to practise, and with hard efforts. Who has kidnapped the son given to me by the magnanimous, pious Dattātraya, (after) being pleased.” (Thus) she wept piteously.

5-9. “O son, O child, O dear child, O habitation of virtues, where are you? Who has taken you away? Talk to me. You are undoubtedly the ornament of the entire lunar dynasty. Who has taken you away, you united with my life? Who has today kidnapped my son, full of divine, good marks of a king and having lotus-like eyes? What shall I do? Where shall I go? I distinctly know the deed I did in the previous existence: I (must) have repudiated a deposit; therefore my son is kidnapped. Or did I, a sinner, cheat someone in the former existence? I am suffering a calamity due to that deed only, and not otherwise (i.e. not due to anything else).

10\. I had become the snatcher of a gem. (Therefore) the gem in the form of my divine son, the mine of matchless virtues, is snatched away by destiny.

11\. Or did I argue with a brāhmaṇa? (And) is it the fruit, attended by the great grief for my son, of that act, that I have undoubtedly got?

12\. Or did I obstruct a child in my previous existence? Am I getting such a fruit of that sinful deed?

13\. Or did I not give the food before the rite of the offering of food to all gods accompanied by the (seven) sacred utterances, to one who had asked for it?”

14-15. Thus, O noble one, Svarbhānu’s daughter Indumatī full of tenderness due to grief, being perturbed and heaving sighs like a cow bereft of her calf, fainted.

16\. That king Āyu (also) was full of great grief and sorrow. Hearing that the boy was kidnapped the king gave up courage.

17\. ‘There is certainly no fruit of penance, nor is there the fruit of giving gifts, since my son has been thus kidnapped.

18-19. Through grace, Dattātreya formerly gave me a boon (in the form) of an unconquerable son, endowed with success and all virtues. How is that grant of boon impeded?’ Engrossed in thought like these, the king who was distressed, wept very much.


