+++
title = "107 Nārada Assures of Nahuṣa’s Return"

+++
 

## *Kuñjala said*:

1-2. Then that Nārada came from heaven to king Āyu. Having come he said to him: “O king, why are you bewailing? O great king, O very intelligent one, knowing that the kidnapping of your son is beneficial to gods and others, do not bewail.

3-4. Being omniscient, virtuous, and equipped with all worldly knowledge, and full of (i.e. endowed with) all arts, your son wilt come (back). O great king, he who has taken away the boy, having virtues like those of a god, to his house, has certainly taken Death.

5\. He, of a great valour and might, will bring about his end. O king, along with Śiva’s daughter he will come to you.

6\. Due to his own lustre the son will be like Indra and Viṣṇu. Due to his righteous acts he will enjoy the position of Indra.”

7\. Speaking like this to king Āyu that best divine sage suddenly left as the king with his servants was seeing.

8\. When that holy Nārada, resembling a god, had gone, Āyu came to that queen and told her all that (Nārada had said).

9-15. (He said:) “O queen, due to Viṣṇu’s grace, Dattātreya gave you, the auspicious one, a son, (like) the best god. O you of an excellent face (i.e. O you beautiful one), my virtuous son will again come back, taking (with him) the head of that one who has kidnapped him. Nārada told (me) like this. O good one, do not grieve; and give up this great delusion of your mind which destroys the (fruit of the) good works that ought to be done.” Hearing the words of her husband, queen Indumatī, was full of joy (due) to the (assurance of the) coming of her son. ‘It shall be as is told by the divine sage. Dattātreya has given me the son, who will be ageless and immortal. There is no doubt about it. It appears to me like this about him.’ Thinking like this, she saluted the best brāhmaṇa. “My salutation to that noble son of Atri, the giver of great prosperity, by whose grace I obtained a very wise, very virtuous and very meritorious son.”

16\. Speaking like this, that respectable lady, who was very much afflicted, knowing that son Nahuṣa would come back, ceased (speaking).


