+++
title = "108 Vasiṣṭha’s Instruction to Nahuṣa"

+++
 

## *Kuñjala said*:

1\. Brahmā’s son Vasiṣṭha, of great lustre and the best among the speakers, called that Nahuṣa and spoke these words (to him).

2\. “Quickly go to the forest, and bring many sylvan products.” Hearing the words of the sage, Nahuṣa came (i.e. went) to the forest.

3-4. There that mighty Nahuṣa heard some good (i.e. agreeable) account: “This is that pious and mighty Nahuṣa, the very wise son ofĀyu, separated from his mother (right) from his childhood. Due to a great (i.e. painful) separation from him, the wife of Āyu is weeping.

5\. Aśokasundarī practised a very difficult penance. When will that virtuous queen Indumatī see her son named Nahuṣa, conversant with the practice of righteosuness, and formerly kidnapped by the demons?

6-7. For the sake of Āyu’s son the excellent, young daughter of Śiva i.e. Aśokasundarī practised, all alone, penance. When will she be united with this one (i.e. Nahuṣa)?”

8-13. That pious Nahuṣa, full of doubt, heard such worldly words uttered by bards in the sky. Having takens ylvan products, having gone to Vasiṣṭha’s hermitage, having presented the sylvan products to pious Vasiṣṭha, and having joined the palms of his hands and with his neck devoutly bent down, he said to that wise Vasiṣṭha, the best among the ascetics: “Revered sir, listen to the words formerly uttered by a spy: ‘This is Āyu’s son, named Nahuṣa, who has been separated from his mother, Indumatī, by the very troublesome demons. That young daughter of Śiva practised very difficult penance for (obtaining) this wise Nahuṣa (as her husband).’ O preceptor, I heard all this that they talked.

14-16a. Who is that pious Āyu? Who is that virtuous Indumatī? Who is that Aśokasundarī? Who is called Nahuṣa? This is a doubt in my mind. You please dispel it. (Nahuṣa seems to be) some other very wise person. Where is that Nahuṣa? Tell me all that, O father and other things also (if any).”

## *Vasiṣṭha said*:

16b-18a. That pious Āyu is a king, the mighty ruler of the earth. His wife is Indumatī, of a truthful nature and famous. On her, you, a son, abode of virtues and ornament of the lunar dynasty, were begotton by Āyu, the king of kings.

18b-22a. Śiva’s beautiful, amiable daughter, adorned with virtues and form, and of a charming smile, by name Aśokasundarī, all alone practised penance in a penance-grove to obtain him (as her husband). The creator has fittingly and definitely fashioned you as her husband. She practised profound meditation after resorting to the bank of the Ganges. Huṇḍa, the lord of demons, seeing that chaste, lovely lady with lotus-like eyes, and bright with penance, and endowed with beauty, generosity and virtues, all alone, was very much tormented by Cupid’s arrows.

22b-26a. Going near her, he said to her: “Be my wife.” Hearing these words of him, that devout lady said to him: “O Huṇḍa, do not do a rash act; do not talk like this again and again. O hero, you cannot get me, especially (when I am) someone else’s wife. Destiny has formerly fashioned for me (i.e. as my husband) Āyu’s son named Nahuṣa. There is no doubt that that very lustrous, intelligent Nahuṣa, a divine gift, will be (my husband). If you do otherwise (i.e. other than what I tell you), I shall give you a curse by which you will be reduced to ashes.”

26b-33a. Hearing these words of her, he, very much tormented by Cupid’s arrows, cunningly kidnapped her and took her to his own house. Having come to know about it she cursed that mean demon, O glorious one: “You will die at the hands of Nahuṣa.” When you were not born (i.e. before your birth) she was born, as you are (now) telling. O hero, you are that son of Āyu, who was kidnapped by the sinful Huṇḍa, who was protected by the cook, and was sent to my hermitage through the female attendant. O child, I have again told you what the bards and kinnaras had made (you) hear (i.e. described) in the forest on seeing you. Kill that mean demon Huṇḍa, the doer of evil things; and wipe off the tears (of your mother who is) shedding them from her eyes. From here go to the bank of the Ganges and (you will) see the very mighty one (there). Having killed the lord of the demons, bring (her) from his gaol. Be the husband of her who is (known as) Aśokasundarī.

33b-35. I have told you all this—the origin of this question.

Speaking (thus) to Nahuṣa, the very intelligent brāhmaṇa ceased (speaking). Having heard all that wonderful (account) told by that sage, the son of Āyu, thinking and desiring to kill him, became angry.


