+++
title = "109 Vidvara, a Kinnara, Dispels Aśokasundarī’s Apprehensions"

+++
 

## *Kuñjala said*:

1-4. Having saluted, having propitiated and having taken the leave of Vasiṣṭha he, an archer, with arrows in his hand, went out (to the forest). Having well cooked the flesh of a black antelope that child, the good, virtuous, handsome son of Āyu, resembling a god, and endowed with godly qualities, was cleverly protected by her (i.e. that female attendant). With that meat which was well cooked, well dressed, boiled and tasty, the cook very gladly fed that wicked (demon) after talking to him. The demon ate that tasty and sweet meat. He was full of joy also. He went to Aśokasundarī.

5-6. With his mind overcome with passion he quickly said to her: “O auspicious one, your husband, Āyu’s son, has been eaten up by me. O you of a charming body, resort to me only, and enjoy pleasures as desired by you. What will you do with that human being that is (already) dead?”

7-8a. Having heard (these words) the helpless daughter of Śiva replied: “The ageless and faultless husband is given to me by deities. Even the magnanimous gods have not perceived his death.”

8b-10a. Hearing these words of (i.e. spoken by) her, that demon of wicked deeds, repeatedly laughing, said to her: “O beautiful lady, today only I ate up the flesh of the wicked Nahuṣa, Āyu’s son, as soon as he was born.”

10b-12. She, having heard these words, became extremely and fearfully angry. She who (always) stood by truth, and was purified by penance said: “With my mind restrained, I have practised penance. Āyu’s son shall truly live long. O you of wicked deeds, if you desire to live, go from here. Otherwise, I will again curse you.”

13-15. These (words addressed) by her to the king were heard by the cook. (He said:) “O great king, leave her, and resort to someone else.” The wicked-hearted demon, Huṇḍa, directed by him quickly went out to his own wife. He did not at all know the thing which the female attendant and the cook had done. He told the whole account to his wife.

## *Sūta said*:

16-22a. That helpless Aśokasundarī, thinking about her dear lover and tormented by grief and sorrow, became emaciated due to that great (i.e. severe) penance. Repeatedly she thought: ‘What would the demons, who know the means, not cleverly do by various means, and by exertion? The best demons always live in various states of being. By the application of illusory methods I was formerly kidnapped by the demon. Like that the son of Āyu might have been killed. Thinking that luckily he might have been unharmed, he would even observe with great effort whether he has or has not perished. Is the exertion superior? Or is the fruit of deeds superior? How would an object, that is to be, perish? Thence the Veda stands firmly. The speciality is conceived by gods. How will it be otherwise?’

22b-24. The noble one again and again thought like this. (At that time) a kinnara named Vidvara, belonging to a great family, having a large body, having half human body (but) without wings, having two hands, and a flute in one hand, adorned with necklaces and bracelets, with his body besmeared with divine sandal (-paste), came (there) with his wife.

25-37. He said to that unhappy daughter of Śiva: “O respectable lady, what are you thinking about? Know me, who have come here, to be Vidvara, a kinnara and Viṣṇu’s devotee, sent by best gods. You need not at all be sorry about Nahuṣa. That sinful Huṇḍa has done every act to kill that intelligent (Nahuṣa); and O auspicious one, he has kidnapped Āyu’s son (i.e. Nahuṣa); but he has been protected by the gods by various means. O you auspicious one of large eyes, Huṇḍa thinks like this: ‘I have kidnapped Āyu’s son and have eaten him up.’ That mean demon left after having told you (like this). That your very glorious husband will live due to the ripening of his own deeds and merit earned in his former existence. O glorious one, the wicked, very sinful killers, contaminating others’ lustre, everyday show forth to destroy the glory of those to destroy whose life produced due to the strength of their merit earned by themselves (in the former existence), they desire. By many means like poison and weapons they then desire to kill the meritorious person protected by means of meritorious deeds. O glorious one, the great sinners like Huṇḍa harass, with many kinds of delusions and obstructions, full of power, the meritorious one, who is well-protected by the employment of (i.e. because of his having done) good deeds and religious merit. O auspicious one, means—like amulets, spells, charms, weapons, fire, poison, binding—become useless. (Deities) protect the magnanimous one who is (already) well protected by divine merit. The doers of (charms etc.) are reduced to ashes, (while), he, the meritorious one, remains (unharmed).

38-47. O auspicious one, all deities are the protectors of Āyu’s son. He is the store of religious merit and the treasure of penance. Therefore the brave Nahuṣa, the best among the mighty, is protected by means of that truthfulness, panance, merit, controls and restraints. Do not have agonizing pain; give up your groundless sorrow. The religious-minded one is living in a forest even without his mother and father. He lives alone in a forest, (is) looked after by ascetics. He knows the philosophy of the Vedas and the Vedāṅgas and has mastered archery. O you of a beautiful (i.e. slender) waist, as the moon shines with his digits and lustre, he is shining with his arts. He, the killer of his brave enemies, the killer of his foes and dear to gods, shines by means of his lores, great religious merit, penance and glory also. He will have you after killing Huṇḍa, the lord of demons. The great devotee will be the sole ruler of the earth along with you, as Indra is in heaven. O auspicious one, from him you will obtain a good son, resembling Indra, knowing Dharma, eagerly engaged in protecting his subjects, named Yayāti; also a hundred daughters endowed with beauty, generosity and (other) virtues, due to whose merit you will go to Indra’s heaven. O you respectable lady, Nahuṣa of a virtuous valour will enjoy Indra’s position.

48-54. Your son will be religious-minded Yayāti, the great king, protector of the subjects and very kind to all beings. He will have four sons of great prowess, endowed with strength and valour and masters of archery: The first will be Turu, the second will be Puru, the third will be Uru, and the fourth will be brave Yadu. Like this, the sons will be very brave, lustrous, very powerful, noble, and endowed with full lustre. Yadu’s sons will be brave, valourous like lions. Well-being to you. Now listen to their names when I am telling them to you: Bhoja, Bhīmaka and Andhaka and Kuñjara also. (The fifth one) will be Vṛṣṇi by name, religious-minded and prop of truth. The sixth will be Śrutasena, and the seventh will be Śrutadhara. (The eighth will be) Kāladaṃṣṭra, very powerful, mighty and conqueror of (even) Death in a battle.

55-60. O you of an excellent face, Yadu’s sons called Yādavas will be very brave. They will have thousands of sons and grandsons. O respectable lady, such will be the dynasty of Nahuṣa. Thus giving up sorrow, proceed happily. O you of an auspicious face, having killed the demon Huṇḍa, your very wise husband will come (to you) and will marry you. Hot tears due to grief fall from the eyes of Indumatī. He, the remover of the pride (of the haughty), will wipe them. Having made his father happy he will protect his subjects. O auspicious one, I have told you all this that the gods had said. Giving up your grief and sorrow, carry on happily.”

## *Aśokasundarī said*:

61\. If he is ordained to be my husband by the deities when will he come? O you who know Dharma, tell me the truth; increase my happiness.

## *Vidvara said*:

62\. O beautiful lady, listen. You will soon see your husband.

Speaking like this, the gandharva (? kinnara) went to the abode of gods.

63\. Aśokasundarī, the daughter of Śiva, giving up desires, anger and greed, practised penance there only.


