+++
title = "116 Nahuṣa Marries Aśokasundarī"

+++
 

## *Kuñjala said*:

1-3. That devout Aśokasundarī, auspicious and joyful, reaching, along with Rambhā, the powerful Nahuṣa, said to him: “I am your legal devout wife, as ordained by the gods. O hero, if you desire merit here (i.e. in this world, then please) marry me. Always thinking of you, I remained in penance. O best king, by virtue of my merit I have obtained you.”

## *Nahuṣa said*:

4-5a. If you, O good lady, are directed to be my wife, and for that you remained in penance, then after a short time, in accordance with the words of my preceptor, I shall be your husband. O you beautiful lady, we two shall go with this Rambhā.

5b-8. He, of a great glory, putting her and the beautiful Rambhā in his chariot, quickly went with the two in that excellent chariot to Vasiṣṭha’s hermitage. He, of a great lustre and full of great joy, saw the brāhmaṇa (Vasiṣṭha) in the hermitage and with her (i.e. Aśokasundarī) saluted him. He narrated everything to that magnanimous Vasiṣṭha as to how the battle took place on the battlefield and how that mean demon was killed by him.

9-12. Vasiṣṭha too, hearing about the activities of Nahuṣa, was full of great joy, and having congratulated him with blessings, the best sage got them married on an auspicious day when the auspicious moment had arrived in the presence of brāhmaṇas and fire. After congratulating the couple with blessings he sent them (telling Nahuṣa), “O you very intelligent one, go quickly and see your mother and father. Seeing you, let that your mother and your father grow with joy as the ocean grows on a full moon or a new moon day.”

13-14. Thus (saying) the sage, the son of Brahmā, sent the hero (to his parents). He, of a quick pace, after saluting that best brāhmaṇa, went with Mātali in that excellent chariot to see his father and mother also.

## *Sūta said*:

15\. At that time the deities sent a celestial nymph by name Menikā. Āyu’s wife (Indumatī) fell, due to great grief, into the ocean of sorrow.

16-18. To that illustrious queen Indumatī, she (i.e. Menikā) said: “O you fortunate one, give up your sorrow; see your son, with your daughter-in-law, (your son) who has come, endowed with a hero’s glory, to the assembly after having killed the sinful demon who had kidnapped your son (i.e. Nahuṣa himself).” Menikā narrated to that Indumatī the good account of what Nahuṣa had done in the battle.

19-20. Having heard the words of Menikā, she, who was full of great joy, said in a faltering voice: “O friend, you are telling the truth. You have said to me what is very dear and like nectar and encouraging to my mind. I should give you my life etc. and even everything that I possess.”

21-22. Having thus spoken to her (i.e. Menikā), she said these (words) to the king: “O great king, this excellent celestial nymph tells me that your very brave son has come now.” Speaking thus to her husband, she, who was very much delighted, ceased speaking.

23-28. Hearing her words, the lord of kings said to his wife: “O you glorious one, formerly sage Nārada had told me: ‘O king, you should never be worried about your son. Your son will come after having very bravely killed that demon.’ The words which the sage had uttered formerly have come true. O queen, how will his words be otherwise (i.e. untrue)? Dattātreya, the best among sages, is actually a god. Formerly, O queen, you and I served him by means of penance. He has given (us) this gem of a son, having Viṣṇu’s portion. He shall always kill a great wicked-minded demon. Dattātreya has given me the best and very powerful son who is Viṣṇu’s portion, and killer of all demons, and will look after his subjects.”

29-31. Speaking thus to queen Indumatī, the king celebrated with great festivity his son’s arrival. Being full of great joy he again remembered Viṣṇu, endowed with everything, accompanied by groups of gods, of the form of joy, the only highest object, the remover of pain, giving happiness and the great giver of salvation to good followers of Viṣṇu.


