+++
title = "117 Nahuṣa’s Consecration"

+++
 

## *Kuñjala said*:

1-10. Nahuṣa with his wife and Rambhā came in that excellent, divine chariot of Indra to the city called Nāga which was endowed with all beauty, divine auspicious objects, which was adorned with mansions, which possessed golden portals, which was beautified with banners, and with the sounds of many musical instruments, and with panegyrists and bards. It was also adorned with auspicious men resembling gods in form, with women of divine forms and, with elephants, horses and chariots. It was full of many auspicious sounds and sounds (of the recitation) of the Vedas, the sounds of music and musical instruments, and of flutes and lutes. He entered the best city full of all (kinds) of beauty. The hero honoured with the auspicious Veda recitation by brāhmaṇas saw his father and very meritorious mother. Being full of great joy, he saluted his father’s feet. That beautiful Aśokasundarī devoutly saluted the feet of both of them again and again. That Rambhā also saluted them and expressed her affection (for them). The prince having saluted his father and having talked to him inquired about the health of his mother and father. With horripilation due to joy the illustrious one (i.e. Āyu) spoke thus:

## *Āyu said*:

11-12. On seeing you, O son, today only all (my) ailments have disappeared; both (my) grief and sorrow have gone (away); the world is delighted with great satisfaction. When you of a great prowess were born, I became blessed. Emancipating your race you have also emancipated me.

## *Indumatī said*:

13-14. O illustrious one, as when the full moon and the new moon (day) arrives, the great ocean, seeing the lustre of the moon increases, similarly I have grown (with joy) on seeing you. I am glorified; I am very glad; I am full of joy. O you, destroyer of the pride (of your enemies), O you very wise one, on seeing you I have become blessed.

15-16. Then that auspicious queen Indumatī, having spoken like this to that son, embraced that excellent son, having smelt him on his head, as a cow smells her calf, and having greeted that son of the form of Nahuṣa, honoured him with blessings.

## *Sūta said*:

17-19. Then that very glorious son narrated to his mother, the auspicious queen Indumatī, the account of his being kidnapped, the birth and acquisition of his wife, his battle with Huṇḍa, and the destruction of Huṇḍa. He himself told in brief all that account giving delight, to his mother and father.

20-24. The mother and father, having heard about the valour and exertion of their son, were full of great joy and their hearts were full (of delight). Taking his bow and (seated) in Indra’s chariot, Nahuṣa conquered the earth spreading over the seven islands along with towns. He presented the earth, full of wealth, to his father. Always giving joy to his father by means of good acts, he made his father perform sacrifices like Rājasūya. Āyu’s son made his parents rich by means of great sacrifices, gifts, vows, restraints and curbs, glory, meritorious and very prosperous sacrifices.

25-30. Then the gods having come to the excellent city called Nāga consecrated the noble Nahuṣa, the destroyer of heroes. The sages possessing great faculties and king Āyu consecrated him on his throne with Śiva’s daughter. The very glorious and pious king Āyu, united with his wife, went with his own body to heaven, well honoured by gods and siddhas. Leaving the place of Indra he again went to Brahmā’s world. Then well-honoured by sages and gods he went to Śiva’s heaven. Due to his own deeds and the great lustre of his son the great king went to Viṣṇu’s heaven, and the king lived (there) due to his religious merit. O illustrious one, men should produce such excellent merit by (performing) meritorious acts like this, not by other acts causing grief.

31-33. I have told you all the account of that king, as to how that pious Nahuṣa became the emancipator of his father, the supporter of the entire family, and very learned. O my son Kapiñjala, tell me what other things I shall tell you. The man who listens to such pious, pure account, endowed with glory, of Āyu’s son, enjoys pleasures and obtains the place of Viṣṇu.


