+++
title = "119 The Birth of Kāmodā"

+++
 

## *Kapiñjala said*:

1-4. O father, from her laughter are produced very charming, divinely fragrant flowers, difficult to be obtained (even) by gods and demons; but, O you very intelligent one, why do all

deities long for them? Śiva is pleased when he is well-worshipped with the flowers (produced) from her laughter. Tell me in detail as to what merit the flower possesses. Who would be (i.e. is) that Kāmodā? Whose daughter is that excellent lady? (Tell me how) from her laughter good flowers are produced. Tell me about the merit. Tell me in detail her complete story.

## *Kuñjala said*:

5-16. Formerly gods and great demons formed a great friendship and eager for (obtaining) nectar, they churned the milky ocean. Due to the churning done by the gods and demons four maiden-gems (came out), whom Varuṇa first pointed out and again Soma also. Then the nectar-containing pitcher was pointed out. The ancient group of the four maidens desired the well-being of the gods. The first one was Sulakṣmī by name. The second was Vāruṇī. (The third) was known as Jyeṣṭhā. The other one was called Kāmodā. Among them the excellent and best one was produced first. Therefore, O very intelligent one, she is known as Jyeṣṭhā, and is always worshipped in the world. Vāruṇī is of the form of a drink, and has come up from the foam of water. The one called Kāmodā, has come up from the ripple of the nectar. King Soma (i.e. the Moon) and Lakṣmī similarly sprang from the nectar. Soma became the ornament of the three worlds and dear to Śiva. Similarly Vāruṇī became the remover of death and disease among the gods. Jyeṣṭhā gave great merit to people desiring well-being. The goddess Kāmodā, giver of merit, sprang from the nectar. In the future she will have the form of a tree for the love of Viṣṇu. She will always delight Viṣṇu. She, the auspicious one, will be certainly (known) by the name Tulasī. There is no doubt that the lord of the world (i.e. Viṣṇu) will dally with her. Kṛṣṇa regards the obligations of him who takes (just) one Tulasī-leaf and offers it to Kṛṣṇa, who thinking, ‘What should I give him?’ becomes dear to him.

17-23. Thus this one named Kāmodā, formerly sprang up from the ocean. When the goddess, speaking in a faltering way due to joy laughs, charming, fragrant flowers fall from her mouth. He who, a diligent one, takes fresh, good flowers and would worship Śiva, Brahmā and Viṣṇu (with them), has gods pleased with him, and they give him whatever he desires. When she, grieved due to some misery, weaps, tears are produced in her eyes and they fall from them. O glorious one, they are also (turned into) charming, large flowers (but) without fragrance. He who worships Śiva with them, has sorrow and tormentation. There is no doubt about this. There is no doubt that gods give misery to that wicked-minded one who (even) once worships gods with such flowers. I have told you this excellent account of Kāmodā.

24-26. Then Kṛṣṇa thought after seeing the valour and cruelty of Vihuṇḍa, the exertion and violence of the sinner, and sent Nārada (to him telling Nārada): “Delude this irresistible one.” Hearing the words of that magnanimous Viṣṇu, Nārada went to that wicked lord of demons, who was going to Kāmodā, and with a smile, said to him:

27-28. “O lord of demons, where are you, (so) eager, now going hurriedly and for what work? For whose work (are you going)? Who has prompted you?” Having saluted Nārada, the son of Brahmā, with the palms of his hands folded, he replied; “O best brāhmaṇa, I have set out for Kāmodā-flowers.”

29-36. The pious one (i.e. Nārada) said to him: “What purpose will the flowers serve for you?” He again told the best brāhmaṇa the reason for his act. “In the region of the Nadana-grove, there is an excellent lady. On seeing her I am influenced by (the passion of) love. O best brāhmaṇa, she told me: ‘With seven crores of flowers growing in Kāmodā, worship Śiva. Then I shall be your very dear wife. There is no doubt about this.’ For that I am today proceeding to the city called Kāmodā. Listen, now I am longing for her, born from the ocean. I shall make her laugh with loud laughters delighting the mind. The illustrious one, being pleased will repeatedly laugḥ. Her faltering laughter will augment my undertaking, O brāhmaṇa. From that laughter divine flowers will fall (down). With them I shall properly worship (Śiva) the lord of Umā. Śiva, the lord, the controller of all beings and the creator of the world being pleased by that offering of worship will give me (its) fruit.”

## *Nārada said*:

37-43. O demon, you should not go to that best city called Kāmodā. The very intelligent Viṣṇu, the destroyer of all demons stays there. O demon, I shall tell you about the way by which the flowers called Kāmodā will fall into your hand. There is no doubt that the divine flowers will fall into the water of the Ganges. Being drifted by the divine water (of the Ganges) they will come (to you) immediately. You (please) take those very charming and large (flowers). Taking those flowers you accomplish what is desired by your mind.

That pious Nārada, having (thus) deluded that best demon, again thought to himself: ‘Being grieved in what way will she shed tears?’ When Nārada was thinking like this, that moment an idea struck him, and he went to the city of Kāmodā.


