+++
title = "01"

+++


**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 1: ****Maitreya - ****Kathitaa gurunaa samyak bhoo samudra aadi samsthitih | ****Sooryaadeenaam cha samsthaanam jyotishaam cha ati vistaraat ||** The *bhoo mandala*, the *samudraas*, how they are located, what is their disposition, were all very clearly taught to me you. *Soorya * and others also, their positions, their activities were told. And also the *nakshatraas*, in great detail, were taught by you. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Uktah prathama amshe prajaa sargah | Dviteeye tat sheshah priyavrata ****vamshah, prasaktah srushtaanaam aavaasa bhooto loka sanniveshah | Atha ****truteeya chaturthayoh vaidikah manu vyaasa aadi pravartito dharmah, tat ****sthaapako kshatra vamshah cha kramaat uchyate | Tatra amsha dvaya ****ukthaartham anoodya manvantaraani prucchati - kathita iti |** In *Amsha * 1, *srushti * was taught. In *Amsha * 2, the remaining part of that *srushti*, the *Priyavrata vamsha*, was taught. Whoever was created, their place of residence was told. What is now to be told is - who are the people living here, what they are doing, all these things are remaining to be told. In *Amshas * 3 and 4, *Manu, Vyaasa*, and others who spread this *vaidika dharma*, and practiced the *dharma*, that is going to be told. And whatever they taught, those *vaidika dharmaas*, those who helped in establishing that, those *Kshatra vamshaas*, the *vamshaas * of the kings, are also going to be told in order. He tells briefly what was told in the two *Amshaas*, and then asks what is it that he wants to know. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 2: ****Devaadeenaam tathaa srushtih rusheenaam cha api varnitaa | ****Chaaturvarnasya cha utpattih tiryak yonigatasya cha ||** You also told about the creation of *deva * and others, all the *rishis*, very clearly in detail. And also the four *varnaas*, how they were created, *Braahmana, Kshatriya, **Vaishya, Shoodra*, and also the creation of the animals was also told. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 3: **www. [[1]] of 219 Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 **Dhruva prahlaada charitam vistaraat cha tvaya uditam | ****Manvantaraani asheshaani shrotum icchaami anukramaat || **You taught me *Dhruvacharita * and *Prahlaada charita * in great detail. Now, I would like to listen to all the *Manvantaraas*, in this order. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 4: ****Manvantara adhipaan cha eva shakra deva purogamaan | ****Bhavataa kathitaan etaan shrotum icchaami aham guro ||** Who are the presiding kings in all these *Manvantaraas*, who was the *Indra * at that time in each of the *Manvantaraas*, who are the *devaas*, who are the *rishis*, all the details I would like to know. I would like to listen to these, being taught by you, about all these details. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 5: ****Sri Paraasharah - ****Ateeta anaagataani iha yaani manvantaraani vai | ****Taani aham bhavatah samyak kathayaami yathaa kramam || **I will now teach you whatever is past, and whatever is going to come, and also whatever is presently there. All the *manvantaraas * which are past, all the *manvantaraas * which are going to come in future, all those things I am going to tell you in detail, in order. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Ateeta iti | Ateeta anaagatayoh eva vartamaanasya antarbhaavaat na pruthak ****uktih | Iha - vaaraahe kalpe | **The present one is not told, as it is included in what is past and what is going to come. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 6: ****Svaayambhuvo manuh poorvam parah svarochishah tathaa | ****Uttamah taamasah cha eva raivatah chaakshushah tathaa || **Earlier, the *manvantara * was *Svaayambhuva*, and after that *Svaarochisha*, then *Uttama*, then *Taamasa*, then *Raivata*, then *Chaakshusha*. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 7: ****Shadete manavo ateetaah saampratam tu raveh sutah | ****Vaivasvato ayam yah tu etat saptamam vartate antaram ||** These six *Manus * were there in the past. Currently, it is *Ravi * or *Vivasvaan *- his son, *Vaivasvata*. Now, it is *Vaivasvata manvantara*, the seventh *manvantara * is presently running. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 8: ****Svaayambhuvam tu kathitam kalpaadou antaram mayaa | ****Devaah tatra rushayah cha eva yathaavat kathitaa mayaa || **I told you already about the *Svaayambhuva Manvantara*. I also told you that in the *Svaayambhuva Manu's * time, who were the *devaas, rishis*, and all this. www. [[2]] of 219 Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



  
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Svaayambhuvam iti | Svaayambhuvam kathitam prathama amshe | Tatra hi ****tasya manoh vamshyaah priyavrataadyaah uktaah | Devaascha yaamaakhyaa ****dvaadasha, indrastu vishvabhuk aakhyah, \* teshaam indrah tadaa hi aaseet ****vishvabhuk prathamah smrutah, iti vaayu ukteh | Rishayoh mareechyaadyaah |** In the First *Amsha * itself, the *Svaayambhuva Manvantara * was explained in detail. And those who came in his *vamsha, Priyavrata*, and others, those details were also told. The *devaas, yaamaas*, and others, *Vishvabhuk * and all the *Indraas*. In the *Vaayu Puraana*, it is told that the first Indra was *Vishvabhuk*, and *Mareechi * and other *Rishis*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 9: ****Ata oordhvam pravakshyaami manoh svaarochishasya tu | ****Manvantaraadhipaan samyak devarsheen tat sutaan tathaa ||** Now, I am going to tell you, about all the *Manvantaraas * after the *Svaayambhuva **Manvantara*. I will now tell you the details of *Svaarochisha Manu*. Who were the presiding kings during that time, the *devaas, rishis*, the ruling kings, and their children.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Ata iti | Devarsheen mareechyaadeen | Tat sutaan - manu putraan |** 



From here, till the end of this chapter, various names are going to be told, in each of the *Manvantara*. Who are the kings, who are the gods, who are the sons of the kings, names will be told.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 10: ****Paraavataah satushitaa devaah svaarochishe antare | ****Vipaschit tatra devendro maitreya aaseet mahaabalah ||** In *Svaarochisha Manvantara, Paaraavata * and *Sushita gana * are the *deva ganaas *- two groups of *devaas*. The *Indra * was *Vipaschit*, he was very powerful, O *Maitreya*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 11: ****Oorjah stambhah tathaa praano dattognee rushabhah tathaa | ****Nirayah cha pareevaan cha tatra saptarshayo abhavan ||** The *Sapta rishis * during *Svaarochisha manvantara * were *Oorjaa, Stambha, Praana, **Dattogni, Rushabha, Niraya, Pareevaan*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 12: ****Chaitra kimpurushaadyaah cha sutaah svaarochishasya tu | ****Dviteeyam etat vyaakhyaayatam antaram shrunu chottaram ||** *Svaarochisha Manu's * children were *Chaitra * and *Kimpurusha * and others. These are the details of the second *manvantara*, the *Svaarochisha manvantara*. Next comes the *Uttama Manvantara, Uttama * is the name of the *Manu*. ****www.sadagopan.org  [[3]] of 219 





Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 13: ****Truteeye api antare brahman uttamo naama yo manuh | ****Sushaantih naama devendro maitreya aaseet sureshvarah ||** In the third *Manvantara*, the *Manu * was *Uttama*. During that time, O *Maitreya*, the head of all gods, *Devendra*, was *Sushaanti*. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 14: ****Sudhaamaanah tathaa satyaa japaah cha atha pratardanah | ****Vashavartih cha pancha ete ganaa dvaadashakaah smrutaah ||** The *devaas * who were there, there were five groups of hosts of *devaas*, and each group had twelve *devaas*. One is *Sudhaamaana*, second is *Satya*, third is *Japa*, fourth is *Pratardana*, fifth is *Vashavarti*. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Sudhaamaana iti | Aadya truteeyayoh deva ganaanaam dvaadashakatva uktayaa ****dviteeye api dvaadashakatvam jnyeyam, \* Dviteeye cha truteeye cha dvaadasho ****dvou ganou smrutou, iti vaayu ukteh |** In the first and third *manvantara, deva ganaas * are told as 12 *devaas * in each. We have to understand in the same way in the second one also. This is told in *Vaayu **Puraana*. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 15: ****Vasishta tanayaa hi ete sapta saptarshayo abhavan | ****Ajah parashudeepta aadyaah tathaa uttama manoh sutaah || **During *Uttama Manvantara, Vasishta's * children became *Saptarshis. Uttama **Manu's * children were *Aja, Parashu, Deepta*, and others. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Vasishta iti | Vasishta tanayaa rajo gotraadyaah sapta uktaah prathama amshe |** In the first *Amsha*, it was told that *Vasishtha's * children became *Saptarshis*. This is told in the *Uttama Manvantara*. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 16: ****Taamasasya antare devaah supaaraah harayah tathaa | ****Satyaah cha sudhiyah cha eva saptavimshatikaa ganaah ||** In *Taamasa Manu's * period, *Supaara, Hari, Satya, Sudhi * were the four *deva **ganaas * which were there, and each one had 27 gods in each group. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 17: ****Shibi indrah tathaa cha aaseet shata yajnya upalakshanah | ****Saptarshayah cha ye teshaam sapta naamaani me shrunu ||** *Indra * during *Taamasa Manvantara * was *Shibi*, and he was *Shatakratu*, had done hundred *Ashvamedha Yaagaas. Saptarshis* I am going to tell you. **Sri Engal Aalwaan’s Commentary: ****Shibih iti | Shata yajnya upalakshana iti | Shata ashvamedha kartrutvena **www. [[4]] of 219 Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





**upalakshitam sahasra akshatva vajritva aadi chinham sarvendraanaam samam, \* ****sarva manvantarendraah te vijnyeyaah tulya lakshanaah iti vaayu ukteh |** Having performed hundred *Ashvamedha yaagaas, Indra * is also called *Shatakratu*, having done 100 *Ashvamedha yaagaas*. It is said that all the *Indraas * have this characteristic. Because of this, they have attained *sahasraakshitva, **vajritva *\(having *Vajraayudha*\), these characteristics are similar in all *Indraas*. In all *Manvantaraas*, characteristics of Indra are similar. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 18: ****Jyotirdhaamaa pruthuh kaavyah chaitro agnih dhanakah tathaa | ****Peevarah cha rushayo hi ete sapta tatra api cha antare || ***Jyotirdhaama, Pruthu, Kaavya, Chaitra, Agni, Dhanak, Peevara*, are the seven *rishis * in the *Taamasa Manvantara*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 19: ****Narah khyaatih keturoopo jaanujanghaadayah tathaa | ****Putraah tu taamasasya aasan raajaanah sumaabalaah ||** *Taamasa Manu's * children were very powerful, and their names are *Nara, Khyaati, **Keturoopa, Jaanujangha*, and others. 



Similarly, other *Manvantaraas * are going to be told in this Chapter. We will take up the study of the Fifth *Manvantara * onwards now. We are studying *Amsha * 3, Chapter 1. Where the details of the past *Manvantaraas * narrated by *Sri Paraasharar * to *Maitreyar*. In that, we had studied about 4 *Manvantaraas*. Now, the fifth *Manvantara * is going to be told. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 20: ****Panchame va api maitreya raivato naama naamatah | ****Manuh vibhuh cha tatra indro devaan cha atra antare shrunu ||** The fifth *Manvantara * is known as *Raivata Manvantara. Manu * is called *Raivata * only. *Indra's * name is *Vibhu*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 21: ****Amitaabhaa bhootarayaa vaikunthaah susamedhasah | ****Ete deva ganaah tatra chaturdasha chaturdasha ||** The *Deva ganaas * are these four group of *devataas, Amitaabha, Bhootarayaa, **Vaikuntha, Susamedhasa*. Each one is having 14 *devataas*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 22: ****Hiranyaromaa vedashree oordhvabaahuh tathaa avarah | ****Vedabaahuh sudhaamaa cha parjanyah cha mahaamunih | ****Ete saptarshayo vipra tatra aasan raivate antare ||** The *Saptarshis * there are - *Hiranyaroma, Vedashree, Oordhvabaahu, Vedabaahu, **Sudhaama, Parjanya, Manaamuni*. In the *Raivata Manvantara*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 23: **www.sadagopan.org  [[5]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



**Balabandhuh cha sambhaavyah satyakaadyaah cha tat sutaah | ****Narendraah cha mahaaveeryaa babhoovuh munisattama ||** The *Manu's * children were *Balabandhu, Sambhaavya, Satyaka * and others. They were actually ruling during that *Manvantara*, and were very courageous and valorous. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 24: ****Svaarochishah cha uttamah cha taamaso raivatah tathaa | ****Priyavrata anvayaah hi ete chatvaaro manavah smrutaah ||** The four, which are *Svaarochisha, Uttama, Taamasa * and *Raivata * are belonging to the *Priyavrata vamsha*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Svaarochisha iti | Aadi sarge prathama shashtha manvoh anvayasya uktatvaat ****iha svaarochishaadi chatushkasya anvayam aaha - priyavrata anvayaa iti |** In the first *sarga*, in the beginning, the *prathama * and sixth *Manu's anvaya * was told. Here, the remaining are told. Belonging to the *vamsha * of *Priyavrata*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 25: ****Vishnum aaraadhya tapasaa sa raajarshih priyavratah | ****Manvantaraadhipaan etaan labdhavaan aatma vamshajaan || ***Priyavrata * worshipped *Vishnu*, and because of his tapas, *Vishnu * was very pleased. He got the *vara * from *Vishnu*. Those who are presiding over these *Manvantaraas, **Svaarochisa, Uttama, Taamasa, Raivata*, he had them as followers of his *vamsha*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 26: ****Shashte manvantare cha aaseet chaakshushaakhyaah tathaa manuh | ****Manojavah tathaa eva indro devaan api nibodha me ||** In the sixth *Manvantara*, the name of the *Manu * was *Chaakshusha*. *Indra's * name was *Manojava*, and I am going to tell you about the *devataas*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 27: ****Aapyaah prasootaa bhavyaah cha pruthukaah cha divoukasah | ****Mahaanubhaavaa lekhaah cha panchaite hi ashtakaa ganaah ||** There are five groups of *devataas*, each having 8 *devataas*. They are *Aapya, **Prasoota, Bhavya, Pruthukaa * and *Lekhaa*. They were all excellent and great *devataas*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 28: ****Sumedhaa virajaah cha eva havishmaan uttamo madhuh | ****Atinaamaa sahishnuh cha sapta aasan iti charshayah || **The *Saptarshis * were *Sumedha, Virajaa, Havishmaan, Uttama, Madhu, Atinaamaa, **Sahishnu*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 29: ****Ooruh puruh shatadyumnah pramukhaah sumahaabalaah | **www.sadagopan.org  [[6]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



**Chaakshushasya manoh putraah pruthivee patayo abhavan ||** *Chaakshusha Manu's * children were *Ooru, Puru, Shatadyumna*, and others who were very powerful. And they were ruling over the earth during that time.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 30: ****Vivasvatah suto vipra shraadhadevo mahaadyutih | ****Manuh samvartate dheemaan saampratam saptame antare ||** *Vivasvaan's * son who is *Shraaddhadeva * is the seventh *Manu*; he had lot of *tejas*, was a very brilliant *Manu*, very knowledgeable. He is the *Manu * in the current *Manvantara*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 31: ****Aaditya vasu rudraadyaa devaah cha atra mahaamune | ****Purandarah tathaa eva atra maitreya tridasheshavarah ||** *Aaditya, Vasu, Rudra*, and others are the *devataas * in the current *Manvantara. **Purandara * is the name of the Indra, he head of the *devataas*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 32: ****Vasishthah kaashyapo atha atrih jamadagnih sa goutamah | ****Vishvaamitra bharadvaajou sapta saptarshayo atra tu ||** The seven *Saptarshis * in the current seventh *Manvantara * are *Vasishtha, Kaashyapa, **Atri, Jamadagni, Goutama, Vishvaamtra * and *Bharadvaaja*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 33: ****Ikshvaakuh cha nrugah cha eva shrushtah sharyaatih eva cha | ****Narishyantah cha vikhyaato naabhaago arishta eva cha ||   


**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 34: ****Karooshah cha prushadhrah cha vasumaan loka vishrutah | ****Manoh vaivasvatasya ete nava putraah sudhaarmikaah ||** *Vaivasvata Manu * had nine children, *Ikshvaaku, Nruga, Srushta, Sharyaati, **Narishyanta, Naabhaaga, Arishta, Karoosha, Prushadhra*. They were well known all over, had a lot of wealth. *Prushadhra * had a lot of wealth, and was very famous all over.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 35: ****Vishnu shaktih anoupamyaa sattva udriktaa sthitou sthitaa | ****Manvantareshu ashesheshu devatvena adhitishthati ||** Now, *Paraasharar * tells that all these *Manvantaraas * and *Manus, **devataas * and *Saptarshis *- how are they all functioning? They are all functioning because of the *Amsha * of *Vishnu. Vishnu Amsha * is the one which is presiding over all of them and making them perform their roles. The *shakti * of *Vishnu * is incomparable, has very high *Sattva*, is engaged in the sustenance of the worlds during the *Manvantaraas*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: **www.sadagopan.org  [[7]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



**Vishnu shaktih iti | Vishnu shaktih vishnoh amshah | Devatvena manvaadi jagat ****rakshakena yajnya aadi devataa roopena adhitishthati, manvaadeen iti sheshah ****|** *Manu * and others who are protecting the world, and also in the form of *devataas, **yajnya*, which will be told now. *Vishnu * is present in the form of *yajnya * and other *devataas*, and also as *Manu * and others who are actually protecting the world during that time.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 36: ****Amshena tasyaa jajnye asou yajnyah svaayambhuve antare | ****Aakootyaam maanaso deva utpannah prathame antare ||** From *Vishnu's Amsha*, was born as *Yajnya*, as His own *Amsha*, in *Svayambhuva **Manvantara*. He was born to *Aakooti * from *Maanasa Deva*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Amshena iti | Tasya vishnoh amshena svaayambhuve antare yajnyo jajnye | ****Tasya iti pullinga nirdeshah paathaantare | Katham jajnye iti atra aaha ****aakootyaam iti |** *Yajnya * was born in the *Svaayambhuva Manvantara*. There is also a masculine form as *tasya*. How was He born - as a son of *Aakooti*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 37: ****Tatah punah sa vai devah praapte svaarochishe antare | ****Tushitaayaam samutpannou hi ajitah tushitaih saha ||** When the *Svaarochisha Manvantara * came, again, *Vishnu's Amsha * was born in *Tushitaa*. He was born as *Ajita*, along with the *Tushita gana*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 38: ****Outtame api antare devah tushitah tu punah sa vai | ****Satyaayaam abhavat satyah satyaih saha surottamaih ||** *Tushita * only, was again born in the *Uttama Manvantara*, His name was *Satya*, and He was born to *Satyaa * only. The *devataa ganaas * name was also *Satya*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 39: ****Taamasasya antare chaiva saamprate punareva hi | ****Haryaayaam haribhih saarddham harireva babhoova ha || **When the next *Taamasa Manvantara * came, again, He was born to *Haryaa * as *Hari * Himself. Along with the *devataa ganaas * called *Haris*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 40: ****Raivate api antare devah sambhootyaam maanaso abhavaat | ****Sambhooto raivataih saarddham devaih devavaro harih ||** *Hari*, in His *Amsha*, was incarnated along with all the *devataa ganaas * as a *devataa*. He was again born in the *Raivata Manvantara*, as *Maanasa*. He was born to *Sambhooti*, along with the groups of *devataas * called *Raivataas*. The Supreme God *Hari * was born as *Maanasa*. www.sadagopan.org  [[8]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 







**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 41: ****Chaakshushe cha antare devo vaikunthah purushottamah | ****Vikunthaayaam asou jajnye vaikunthaih devataih saha ||** In the *Chaakshusha Manvantara*, that *Purushottama * only, was born as *Vaikuntha*. He was born to *Vikuntha*. Along with the groups of *devataas * called as *Vaikunthaas*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 42: ****Manvantare atra sampraapte tathaa vaivasvate dvija | ****Vaamanah kaashyapaat vishnuh adityaam sambabhoova ha || **Now, in the current *Manvantara, Vaivasvata Manvantara*, He was born as *Vaamana*, to *Kaashyapa * and *Aditi*. He is *Vishnu * only, incarnated as *Vaamana*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 43: ****Tribhih kramaih imaan lokaan jitvaa yena mahaatmanaa | ****Purandaraaya trailokyam dattam nihata kantakam || ***Vaamana * became *Trivikrama*, and in three steps, He occupied all the worlds. He won all the worlds. All the worlds were given to *Purandara *\(name of the *Indra * in *Vaivasvata Manvantara*\) by *Trivikrama*, after eliminating all the enemies. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 44: ****Iti etaah tanavah tasya sapta manvantareshu vai | ****Saptasu eva abhavan vipra yaabhih samvardhitaah prajaah || **Like this, children were born to all the *Manus*, in all the *Manvantaraas*. The children of the *Manus * continued the progeny, and it expanded like that. This is how it happened in the seven *Manvantaraas*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 45: ****Yasmaat vishtam idam vishvam tasya shaktyaa mahaatmanah | ****Tasmaat sa prochyate vishnuh visheh dhaatoh praveshanaat ||** This entire universe is pervaded by the *shakti * of that Supreme *Paramaatman*, Supreme Brahman. That is why He is called *Vishnu. Visha * is the *dhaatu*. Because of this, He is *Vishnu*, all pervading; has entered into everything as *antaraatman*, Inner Self. 



*Visha praveshane. * 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 1, Shloka 46: ****Sarve cha devaah manavah samastaah saptarshayo ye manu soonavah cha | ****Indrashcha yo ayam tridasheshabhooto vishnoh asheshaah tu vibhootayah taah ****|| ***Paraasharar * concludes this chapter by telling that all are *Vishnu's vibhootis. **Vibhooti * also means *shareera*. Everything is present as His *shareera*, supported by Him, controlled by Him, and exists for Him. All the *Devataas, Manus*, all the *Saptarshis*, all the children of the *Manus*, and *Indra * also, who is the king of all www.sadagopan.org  [[9]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



the *devataas*, all are *vibhootis * of *Mahaavishnu * only. They are all His *amsha*, or *shareera*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Vishnutvam vivrunoti - sarve cheti |** 



He narrated all the *Manvantaraas * also to say the *Vishnu Paaramya*, which is told in *Vishnu Puraana*. *Vishnu * is *antaryaami * of everything, is all pervading. All these are established in this *Puraana * everywhere. And all the *Manvantaraas * also narrated to finally conclude that everything is *Vishnu's vibhooti * only. 



This concludes the First Chapter of *Amsha * 3. 



*|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Truteeye Amshe Prathamo Adhyaayah || ** **|| Iti Sri Vishnu Chitteeye Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Truteeye Amshe Prathamo **Adhyaayah || ** *



www.sadagopan.org  [[10]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



  
|| Atha Dviteeyo Adhyaayah || ****Future Manvantaraas, Brahmaatmakatva** * *



Now the Second Chapter. ****
