+++
title = "03"

+++


## 1
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 1:  ****Maitreyah - ****Jnyaatam etat mayaa tattvo yathaa sarvam idam jagat | ****Vishnuh vishnou vishnutah cha na param vidyate tatah ||** *Maitreyar *- Now, from you, your good self, I have realized that the whole world is *Vishnu* only; everything is established in *Vishnu*, and the whole world is created or emanating from *Vishnu* only. There is nobody who is superior to Him. I have understood all these things. 



He is creator. He does *upasamhaara*, goes and merges into Him. He is *antaryaami* and is responsible for the sustenance. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Jnyaatam iti | Jagat vishnuh iti tat aatmakatvam uktam, vishnou iti laya-****sthityoh sthaanatvam, vishnutah iti kaaranatvam | **Everything is *Vishnvaatmaka, Bhagavadaatmaka*. This is told in *saamaanaadhikaranya* through *shareera shareeri bhaava*. He is the *aatman* of everything. Everything is His *shareera*. Everything is established in Him means that He is responsible for the sustenance, and also *laya*, dissolution; He is the place where everything goes and merges. He is the creator, of this world. 



*Paraasharar* has given an introduction in the previous *adhyaaya*, about how *Vedavyaasa* has divided the *Vedaas* into four. Now, *Maitreyar* gets interested in that particular aspect, to know more about it.   


## 2
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 2:  ****Etat tu shrotum icchaami vyastaa vedaa mahaatmanaa | ****Vedavyaasa svaroopena yathaa tena yuge yuge ||** After telling about *Kruta yuga* and *Treta yuga*, you said that in *Dvaapara yuga*, he divides the Veda into four, and hundreds of branches, taking on the form of *Veda **vyaasa*. I want to know how he does the division of *Vedaas*.   


## 3
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 3:  ****Yasmin yasmin yuge vyaaso yo ya aaseet mahaamune | ****Tam tam aachakshva bhagavan shaakhaabhedaam cha me vada ||** Which are the *yugaas*, and which are the *Vyaasaas* who are present there? Please do tell me about all the *Vyaasaas* who were there in the various *yugaas*, and also www.sadagopan.org  [[24]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



the various *shaakhaas* how they were divided.   


## 4
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 4:  ****Sri Paraasharah - ****Vedadrumasya maitreya shaakhaabhedaah sahasrashah | ****Na shakyaa vistaraat vaktum sankshepena shrunushva tam ||** *Sri Paraasharar *- There are thousands of branches in the huge tree of *Veda*. I cannot tell you in detail about everything. I will tell you briefly. Do listen to that.   


## 5
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 5:  ****Dvaapare dvaapare vishnuh vyaasaroopee mahaamune | ****Vedamekam subahudhaa kurute jagato hitah ||** O *Mahaamuni Maitreya*. Every *Dvaapara yuga, Vishnu* takes on the form of *Vyaasa*. Veda, which is present as one single unit \(during *Krutayuga* and *Tretayuga*\), he divides into four *Vedaas*, and multiple branches. Because of the good of the whole world. 





## 6
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 6:  ****Veeryam tejo balam cha alpam manushyaanaam avekshya cha | ****Hitaaya sarvabhootaanaam vedabhedaan karoti sah || **Why is it *hita*, it is told. Looking at the capability, the *tejas*, the *bala *- all these are very diminished and very less in *manushyaas*. Looking at that, for their good, for the good of all beings, he divides the *Vedaas* like this. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Veeryam iti | Veeryam utsaahah; tejah tapoyogaadijanitah prabhaavah; balam ****dhaaranaashaktih | ***Utsaaha* will reduce for people. Performing penance, performing *yoga, tapas *- there is a *prabhaava* which is developed in the people which also reduces in the *Dvaapara yuga*. The capacity to remember, do *anusthaana*, also reduces. Looking at this, for the good of all beings, he divides *Vedaas* like this. 





## 7
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 7:  ****Yayaa asou kurute tanvaa vedamekam pruthak prabhuh | ****Vedavyaasa abhidhaanaa tu saa cha moortih madhuhdvishah || **Whichever form that *Madhudvish*, who destroyed *Madhu, Kaitabha *- whatever body He takes, is called as *Vedavyaasa*. Taking on the form known as *Vedavyaasa*, whichever *shareera* is called as *Vedavyaasa, Bhagavaan* takes and does division of this one *Veda*, that is nothing but the form of *Bhagavaan Madhusoodana* only. 





## 8
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 8:  ****Yasmin manvantare vyaasaah ye ye syuh taan nibodha me | ****Yathaa cha bhedah shaakhaanaam vyaasena kriyate mune || **Whichever *Manvantara*, who are all the *Vyaasaas*, I will tell you all those things. And also the *shaahkaa bhedaas*, how the division into *shaakhaas* are done by *Vyaasa*, that also I will tell you. www.sadagopan.org  [[25]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 







## 9
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 9:  ****Ashtaavimshati krutvo vai vedo vyasto maharshibhih | ****Vaivasvate antare tasmin dvaapareshu punah punah || ***Veda* was divided by the *Maharshis* 28 times, in this *Vaivasvata Manvantara*, in the *Dvaapara yuga*, this has been done like this. This I will tell you again and again.   


## 10
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 10:  ****Vedavyaasaa vyateetaa ye hi ashtaavimshati sattama | ****Chaurdhaa yaih kruto vedo dvaapareshu punah punah ||** In the *Dvaapara yuga*, towards the end, they do this. 28 *Vedavyaasaas* are all past. In *Dvaapara yuga*, again and again how they did into the four divisions, I will tell you that. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Vedavyaasaa iti | Vyateetaah nivrutta adhikaaraah | Ashtaavimshati iti aarshah ****sulopah | **One *chetana* becomes *Vedavyaasa, Bhagavaan* will be the *antaryaami* and does the acts through them, they have this *adhikaara*. Once their *adhikaara* ends, another person will come. 





## 11
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 11:  ****Dvaapare prathame vyastah svayam vedah svayambhuvaa | ****Dviteeye dvaapare cha eva vedavyaasah prajaapatih || **In the very first *Dvaapara yuga*, the *Veda* was divided by none other than *Chaturmukha Brahma* himself. In the second *Dvaapara yuga, **Prajaapati* became the *Vedavyaasa*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Dvaapare iti | Dviteeyo manuh vyaasah \* Brahmaa manum uvaacha idam vedaan ****vyasya prajaapate, iti vaayu ukteh | **Second *Manu* becomes the *Vyaasa*, it says. *Prajaapati* is the *Manu. Brahma* says this to *Manu*. This is told in *Vaayu Puraana*. 





## 12
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 12:  ****Truteeye choshanaa vyaasah chaturthe cha bruhaspatih | ****Savitaa panchame vyaasah shashthe mrutyuh samah prabhuh || **In the third *Dvaapara, Ushanas* becomes the *Vyaasa*. In the fourth one, *Bruhaspati* becomes the *Vyaasa*. In the fifth one, *Savitru devataa* becomes the *Vyaasa*. In the sixth one, *Mrutyu* becomes the *Vyaasa*.   


## 13
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 13:  ****Saptame cha tathaa eva indro vasishthah cha ashtame smrutah | ****Saarasvatah cha navame tridhaamaa dashame smrutah ||** In the seventh *Dvaapara, Indra* becomes the *Veda Vyaasa. Vasishtha* becomes the www.sadagopan.org  [[26]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



eighth *Veda Vyaasa*. The ninth *Vedavyaasa* is *Saarasvata*. The tenth one is *Tridhaamaa*.   


## 14
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 14:  ****Ekaadasho tu trishikho bharadvaajah tatah parah | ****Trayodasho cha antariksho varnee cha api chaturdashe ||** *Trishikha* is the eleventh *Veda Vyaasa. Bharadvaaja* is the twelfth one. The thirteenth is *Antariksha. Varnee* is the fourteenth *Veda Vyaasa*. 





## 15
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 15:  ****Trayyaarunah panchadashe shodashe tu dhananjayah | ****Rutunjayah saptadashe tat oordhvam cha jayah smrutah || **The fifteenth *Veda Vyaasa* is *Triyaaruna*. Sixteenth is *Dhananjaya*. Seventeenth is *Rutunjaya*. Eighteenth is *Jaya*. 





## 16
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 16:  ****Tato vyaaso bharadvaajo bharadvaajaah cha goutamah | ****Goutamaat uttaro vyaaso haryaatmaa yo abhidheeyate || **After that, *Bharadvaaja* becomes the *Vyaasa*, and after *Bharadvaaja, **Goutama* becomes the *Vyaasa*. After *Goutama, Uttara* becomes the *Vyaasa*; he is also called as *Haryaatmaa* in other *Puraanaas*.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Tata iti | Uttamaadavatushkasya puraanaantara prasiddhaani hari aatmaa aadi ****naamaantaraani |**   


## 17
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 17:  ****Atha haryaatmano ante cha smruto vaajashravaa munih | ****Somashushkaayanah tasmaat trunabindhuh iti smrutah ||** After *Haryaatmaa, Vaajashrava* becomes the *Vedavyaasa*. After that, *Trunabindu* is the *Vyaasa*, who belongs to *Somashushkaayana vamsha*.   


## 18
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 18:  ****Ruksho abhoot bhaargavah tasmaat vaalmeekih yo abhidheeyate | ****Tasmaat asmat pitaa shaktih vyaasah tasmaat aham mune ||** After that, *Ruksha*, who is of *Bhrugu vamsha*, becomes the *Veda Vyaasa*; he is also known as *Vaalmeeki*. After *Ruksha, Paraasharar* says that his father *Shakti* is the *Vyaasa*, and after that, I am the *Vedavyaasa*.   


## 19
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 19:  ****Jaatukarno abhavat mattah krushnadvaipaayanah tatah | ****Ashtaavimshatih iti ete vedavyaasah prakeertitah ||** After that, *Krishnadvaipaayana* is the *Vedavyaasa*. Thus, I have told you about 28 *Vedavyaasaas*.   


## 20
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 20:  **www.sadagopan.org  [[27]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



**Eko vedah chaturdhaa tu taih kruto dvaaparaadishu ||** At the end of the *Dvaapara yugaas*, this *Veda vibhajana* is done. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Eka iti | Dvaaparaadishu - dvaaparah aadih eshaam taani dvaaparaadeeni teshu, ****dvaapara sandhi amsheshu iti arthah; dvaapara ante vedavibhaagaprasiddheh | ****\* Dvaapare tu paraavrutte manoh svaayambhuve antare | Brahmaa manum ****uvaacha idam vedaan vyasya prajaapate \* iti vaayu ukteh, shantanu samakaale ****dvaipaayana utpatti prasiddheh cha | **During the gap between *Treta* and *Dvaapara*, is *Dvaapara sandhi*. At the end of *Dvaapara* only was the *Veda vibhaaga* done. There are other *pramaanaas* given to say that at the end of the *Dvaapara* only, is the *Veda vibhaaga* done. 





## 21
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 21:  ****Bhavishye dvaapare cha api drounih vyaaso bhavishyati | ****Vyateete mama putre asmin krushnadvaipaayane mune || **In the future *Dvaapara, Drona's* son *Ashvatthaama* becomes the *Vedavyaasa*. After my son *Krishnadvaipaayana, Ashvatthaama* becomes the *Vyaasa*. 





## 22
Now comes the introduction for what *Paraasharar* is going to teach next. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 22:  ****Dhruvam ekaaksharam brahma omityeva vyavasthitam | ****Bruhatvaat brahmanatvaat cha tat brahmaa iti abhidheeyate ||** *Ekaakshara*, the *pranava*, is *aninaashi*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Atha veda vibhaagaan vakshyan prathamam paratattva praapti upaayatayaa ****upaasyam iti darshayitum pravanaatmakam shabdabrahma pranamiti dhruvamiti ****dvayena | Dhruvam iti | Dhruvam avinaashi, om iti eva vyavasthitam veda ****vibhaage api avibhaktam avikrutam cha, yat pranavaakhyam eka aksharam ****brahma tat bruhatva-bruhmanatvaabhyaam brahmaa iti abhidheeyate, \* ****yasmaat ucchaaryamaana eva bruhati brahmayati tasmaat uchyate param ****brahma \* iti shruteh | **After having told about the 28 *Vedavyaasaas*, who come in every *Dvaaparayuga*, and divide the *Vedaas* into four, with each one having thousands of *shaakhaas*, in order to describe the *Veda vibhaaga*; in order to attain the *Paratattva*, Supreme Reality, what has to be meditated upon as the means, object of meditation, in order to attain the Supreme Reality, he does *namaskaara* to *Shabda-brahma* which is *Pranava*, with these two *shlokaas. Paraasharar* extols the importance and greatness of *Pranava*, which is said to be the beginning of the *Vedaas*, the *prakruti*, that will be told now. " *Yat vedaadou svarah proktah vedaante cha **prakeertitah, tasya prakruti leenasya yah parah sa maheshvarah*", the greatness of that *pranava* is being extolled here. Though the *Vedaas*, which were present as one unit, were divided into four, the *pranava* is *avibhakta*, not divided. *Pranava* is present only as one *akshara*, and is unchanged. It is called *pranava*, is said to be one *akshara*, and is also said to be Brahma. Why is *Pranava* told as *Brahma*, is www.sadagopan.org  [[28]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



because it itself is very vast, and also makes something else as vast. By doing the *ucchaarane* of *Pranava* itself, it makes one great, and also it expands, and makes one big. 





## 23
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 23:  ****Pranava avasthitam nityam bhooh bhuvah svah iti eeryate | ****Rug yajuh saama athaarvano yat tasmai brahmane namah || **It is said that the three *vyaahrutis, Bhooh, Baahyahuvah, Suvah*, are created, and are eternally established in *Pranava*. The *Rigveda, Yajurveda, Saamaveda, **Atharvaveda*, are all established in this only. I pay obeisance to that *pranavaatmaka shabdabrahma*. 



*Bhooh, Bhuvah, Suvah* are said to be *vyaahrutis*. Just by pronouncing them, the three worlds were created by *Brahma*, it is said. All these three - *Bhooh, Bhuvah, **Suvah* are established in *Pranava*.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Bruhatva brahmanatve upapaadayati pranava avasthitam iti | Vyaahruti trayam ****ruk aadi chatushtayam cha pranava avasthitam eeryata iti yaavat, tasmaat ****shabda aatmane tasmai brahmane nama iti anvayah | Pranavasya kaarana ****avasthaayaam antargata vyaahruti aadikatvena bruhatvam | Kaarya ****avasthaayaam vyaahruti veda roopena parinaamaat brahmanatvam iti bhaavah ****|**   


## 24
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 24:  ****Jagatah pralaya utpattyoh yat tat kaarana samjnytam | ****Mahatah paramam guhyam tasmai subrahmane namah ||** From the *akaara, Rigveda* is created; from *ukaara, Yajurveda* is created; from *makaara, Saamaveda* is created. This is why everything is established in *Pranava. Akaara* is said to be *prakruti* of that, and that which is denoted by that *akaara* is *Paramaatman. Akaara* is *vaachaka, vaachya* is *Paramaatman*. The *pralaya, utpatti* of this world, that which is said to be cause of this creation, and dissolution of all these worlds, we pay obeisance to that *Pranava*. Because of the sacred position given to *Pranava*, it is the cause of all the worlds. *Shabda brahma* is thought of as *Pradhaana* itself, *jagat kaarana*. One has to meditate on this as the cause of *jagat*, and also *laya sthaana, pradhaana* which is beyond *mahat*, more subtle than *mahat*, is this *pranava*. One should meditate thus. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Atha pranavam kaaranatayaa pradhaana taadaatmyena stuvan pranamati - ****jagatah ityaadinaa bahudhaatmakam iti antena jagata iti | Pralaya uptpattyoh ****iti | Pradhaanaat hi jagat utpattih, tasmin layah, tasmaat tayoh tat kaaranam | **Because *Pranava* is said to be the *kaarana*, from *Pranama* only, everything is emanating, is told. *Pranava* is the *prakruti* for all the *Vedaas*. It is praised here as www.sadagopan.org  [[29]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



being one with *Pradhaana* itself, the *Moola prakruti*. All these worlds are *praakruta* only, created from *prakruti, sattva, rajas, tamas*. From the *vikaara* of *prakruti* only, all these worlds are created. The three *lokaas, **Bhooh, Bhuvah, Suvah* are created by the *vyaahrutis*, which are all embedded in the *Pranava. Pranava* is said to be equal to, same as *Pradhaana*; and that is how it is praised. *Pranava* is said to be the cause. *Jagat* is created from *Pradhaana*, is *vikaara* of that. *Moola prakruti* becomes *mahat*, then *ahamkaara, tanmaatraas, **panchabhootaas*, etc. During *pralaya*, this happens in the reverse order. Each *kaarya* goes and merges in the *kaarana*. All the *pancha bhootaas* merge into *tanmaatraas, tanmaatraas* merge into *ahamkaara*, that merges into *mahat*, then *mahat* merges into *pradhaana*. This is also told in the *Upanishads*. Because the worlds are created from *vyaahrutis, pranava* is told in *taadaatmya* with *pradhaana* only. So, it is told to be cause of all the worlds explained here.   


## 25
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 25:  ****Agaadha apaaram akshayyam jagat sammohanaalayam | ****Svaprakaasha pravruttibhyaam purushaartha prayojanam ||** These are all the praises for *Pranava* itself. It is very vast, endless. Characteristics of *pradhaana* are superimposed on *pranava* here. It has *sattva, **rajas* and *tamogunaas. Tamas* creates *moha. Sattva* creates *jnyaana. Rajas* is responsible for *pravruttis*, activities, *kaaryaas. Karma* is the effect of *rajas. **Jnyaana* is the effect of *sattva. Moha* is due to *tamas*. Various *purushaarthaas* can be attained by these. It is very vast, does not undergo any change, *avikaari*; it leads to *purushaartha*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Agaadha apaaram iti | Jagat sammohanaalayam paapinaam sammohana ****tamoguna aalayam | Sva prakaasha pravruttibhyaam sattva-rajah ****kaaryaabhyaam jnyaana karmaabhyaam purushaarthasya saadhanam | **



Everything is from *Pranava*. It is the cause of the whole world. Some more *shlokaas* are going to explain the greatness of *Pranava*, making it identical with *pradhaana*, and giving it the characteristics of *pradhaana*. We will see them next. *Pradhaana* has three *gunaas - sattva, rajas, tamas*. The quality of *tamas* causes *moha*, illusion, and wrong knowledge. *Rajas* leads to action; one can do the *vaisika karmaas* and attain the *chatur-vidha purushaarthaas. Sattva **guna* leads to *jnyaana* and one can even attain *moksha*, by increasing the *sattva **guna*. The effects of *sattva* and *rajas* are *jnyaana* and *karma*. It leads to all the *purushaarthaas* and is a means for that. By doing *pranavopaasane*, all this can be done. 





www.sadagopan.org  [[30]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



We are studying *Amsha* 3, Chapter 3, where *Paraasharar* is telling about the 28 *Vedavyaasaas*, who came and divided the *Vedaas*, every time during the end of the *Dvaapara yuga*. And *Bhagavaan* Himself takes the form of *Veda Vyaasa* and does the *Veda vibhajane*, so that people can actually do *adhyayana*, as their power and *jnyaana* had reduced. After that, *Paraasharar* is praising the greatness of *Pranava*, and this is what we are studying. 



*Pranava* is said to be the *prakruti* of all the *Vedaas*. Which is said to encapsulate all the four *Vedaas*, and everything. 



This is praised in the *Upanishads, Taittiriya Upanishad, Om iti brahma, Om **iti idagam sarvam*, and whatever *mantraas* are started, are started with *Pranava*. All the *ritwiks*, whatever *mantraas* they say, they always start with *Pranava* only. The greatness of *Pranava* is told. It is said to be *Paramaatma vaachaka. **Patanjali* says in the *Yoga Shaastras - "Tasya vaachakah **pranavah". Pranavopaasane* is told in the *Upanishads*. 



*Pranava* is praised here, and equated with *pradhaana* itself. It houses all the worlds and encapsulates everything. Just like *pradhaana* which gets modified by the *sankalpa* of *Paramaatman*, being the *antaryaami*. *Pranava* is said to be like that. It is praised as though it is the cause of all the worlds. 





## 26
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 26:  ****Saamkhyaajnyaanavataam nishthaa gatih shama dama aatmanaam | ****Yat tat avyaktam amrutam pravruttih brahma shaashvatam || ***Saamkhya jnyaana* is the knowledge of *prakruti*. In *Saankhya darshana*, it is said that *prakruti* and *purusha viveka* are important. For those who want to attain the *saankhya jnyaana*, this is the *pratishthaa*. Doing *upaasanaa* of *pranava* only, *yogis* who meditate upon the *pranava*, they can attain *shama, dama*, and all the *gunaas* through this. In the *Upanishads*, it is extolled as *avyakta, akshara* and all these *shabdaas*. It is eternal. 



*Avyakta* is unmanifest, very subtle, one cannot see it. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Saamkhyaa iti | Nishthaa - pratishthaa | Purusha viveka upaayatayaa shama-****damaatmanaam yoginaam gatih - shama aadi praapti upaayah | **This is the means for attaining *shama, dama*, and other *aatma gunaas* for those *yogis*.   


## 27
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 27:  ****Pradhaanam aatmayonih cha guhaasamstham cha shabdyate | ****Avibhaagam tathaa shukram akshayam bahudhaatmakam ||** *Pranava* is the cause of *Paramaatman* Himself. In the *Upanishads*, it is told as *avyakta, akshara* and these *shabdaas*. It is extolled in the *Upanishads*. It is partless, and pure. It shows itself as several effects of *prakruti*. www.sadagopan.org  [[31]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



  
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Pradhaanam iti | Aatmano yonih aatmaa paramaatmaa; tasya yonih upanishatsu ****avyaktaadi akshara antaih shabdaih yat bahudhaatmakam - bahuvudham ****shabdyate tasmai pradhaana aatmane shabdabrahmane namah | Kaarya ****dashaayaam mahat aadi roopena vaa bahudhaatmakam | Uktaih gunaih ****poojitatvaat sushabda prayogah |** *Aatmayoni* is told as *aatmano yonih*. It is told as the cause of *Paramaatman. **Pranava* is the *vaachaka* and *vaachya* is *Paramaatman*. Doing meditation on *pranava*, one can attain *Paramaatman*. If we have to know the *vaachya*, it is through *pranava*. This way, it is the cause of *Paramaatman* Himself. It is extolled in the *Upanishads* in many ways, as *avyakta, akshara*. That *shabda brahma* which is the *pradhaana aatmaa*, which is the cause, equal to *pradhaana*. In the state of effect, *mahat, ahamkaara, tanmaatraas, panchabhootaas*, it exists in many forms, and is *bahudaatmaka*. In the *poojyaa artha*, it is told as *subrahmane **namah*, the *'su' shabda* is used for *poojitatva*.   


## 28
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 28:  ****Paramabrahmane tasmai nityam eva namo namah | ****Yat roopam vaasudevasya paramaatmasvaroopinah ||** *Pranava* is extolled as *Bhagavat svaroopa* itself. *Pranava* is the *svaroopa* of the Supreme *Vaasudeva*. I bow down to that *Pranava*, it is *Bhagavat roopa* itself. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Atha pranavam bhagavat roopatvena stuvan pranamati - parama brahmana iti | ****Parama brahmatvam cha vaasudeva roopatvaat | ***Pranava* represents the *Paramaatman* Himself. It is also *vaachaka* for *Paramaatman*.   


## 29
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 29:  ****Etat brahma tridhaa bhedam abhedam api sa prabhuh | ****Sarva bhooteshu abhedo asou bhidyate bhinna buddhibhih ||** This *shabda brahma* which is *pranava*, has three parts - *akaara, **ukaara* and *makaara*; ithas these three *avayavaas*. It remains as one *avayavi* also, as a whole. *Pranava* itself is one, and can also be divided into *akaara, ukaara, **makaara. Pranava* only is Lord *Vaasudeva*; one *Vaasudeva* who is the Lord is present in all beings. He is the one *antaryaami* in all the beings. There is no *bheda* in the *visheshya*. The *visheshanaas* are many - *chetanaas* and *achetanaas*. We see as so many forms - *deva, manushya, pakshi, sareesrupa*; in that way, He is many also. The *prakaaraas* are many, but the *prakaari* is One only. *Pranava* is said to be the *svaroopa* of *Paramaatman*.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Etat iti | Akaara aadi avayava roopena tridhaa bhinnam, avayavi roopena cha ****abhinnam etat - pranava roopam brahma, sa prabhuh - vaasudevah, tat ****roopatvaat tat vaachakatvaat cha | Sa cha sarva bhooteshu aatmatayaa **www.sadagopan.org  [[32]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



**avasthito api abhedah - ekah, prabhutvaat akalushah cha, sva adhishthitaabhih ****bhinnaabhih moortibhih eva bhidyate |** *Pranava* has got three parts - *akaaraa, ukaara* and *makaara*. It is one as *avayavi*. This is the *pranava rooopa brahma*. It represents *Paramaatman*, *Vaasudeva* only, and is also the *vaachaka* for *Paramaatman*. He is present as the inner self of all the beings. He is one only. Because He is the Master, the Lord, He is untainted by the defects of any of these, though He is present as the Inner Self. He is said to be many because of the various forms that we see. All of them are presided over by Him as the Inner Self. This way, He is said to be many. *Sarvam khalvidam brahma*.   


## 30
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 30:  ****Sa rungmayah saamamayah sarvaatmaa sa yajurmayah | ****Rug yajuh saama saara aatmaa sa eva aatmaa shareerinaam ||** He is only present as *Rig Veda svaroopa*, He is *Rig Veda svaroopi, Saama **Veda svaroopi, Yajur Veda svaroopi* also. He is only the *purushaartha* of all these, whatever *karmaas* and others are prescribed in all these *Vedaas*; He is the bestower of the fruits. He is only worshipped by all these *karmaas*. He is only the *aaraadhya* and *phalaprada*. He is the *purushaartha svaroopa* also. He is only the *aatma* of *shareeris* also, *shareeri* means *jeevaatman* here. He only is the Inner Self of the *jeevaatmans* also.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Atah sarva aatmatvaat sa eva ruk aadi moortih iti aaha - sa rungmayah iti | ****Saarah - Ruk aadi pratipaadyah chaturvidhah purushaarthah, tat aatmaa | ****Shareeraanaam kshetrajnyaanaam |** Because He is the *aatma* of everything, He is only present as *Rig Veda* and all the *Vedaas*. The four types of *purushaarthaas*, various *karmaas* which are prescribed to attain those *purushaarthaas*, He is only the *purushaartha*. He is the Inner Controller of all that, and is the Lord. He is worshipped by all the *karmaas*, and bestower of all the *purushaarthaas*. 





## 31
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 3, Shloka 31:  ****Sa bhidyate vedamayah svavedam karoti vedaih bahubhih sashaakham | ****Shaakhaa pranetaa sa samasta shaakhaa jnyaanasvaroopo bhagavaan anantah ****|| **Initially, He only was present as one *Veda*; after that, He was present as four *Vedaas - Rig, Yajus, Saama, Atharva*. In each *Veda*, He creates many branches. He is only present as *Veda Vyaasa* in every *Dvaapara Yuga*. He divided the *Vedaas*, was told. He only is present as all the *shaakhaas*. That is why the *Vedaas* are said to be *ananta*. He is *jnyaana svaroopa* and is known as *ananta*.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Bhagavatah sarvaatmatvam nigamayati - sa bhidyata iti | Sah - avyasta ****vedamayah san rug vedaadi aatmanaa bhidyate | Sa eva shaakhaa pranetru ****bhoota vyaasa aadih bhootvaa vedam sashaakham bahubhih avaantara ****shaakhaabhedaih bhinnam cha karoti | Samasta shaakhaah cha sa eva |** www.sadagopan.org  [[33]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



What is concluded in this *shloka* is that *Bhagavaan's sarvaatmakatva* is concluded. *Vedaas* which were undivided, and present as one unit; He is present in several forms, *Rig, Yajus, Saama, Atharva Veda*. He only is present as *Veda **Vyaasa*, and all the others who form these *shaakhaas*, He is only present in all those forms. He is only the *antaraatma* of everything; the *sarvaatmakatva* of *Bhagavaan* is told. In each *Veda*, He makes it into endless, innumerable number of *shaakhaas*, branches and sub branches. He is only all the branches, *shaakhaas*. 



This concludes this chapter, establishing the *sarvaatmakatva* of *Bhagavaan*, that He is only everything - the *Vedaas*, the branches, the *Vyaasaas* who created these branches, all are He only. He is *aatma* for everything. This is the *sarvaatmakatva* told. 



This completes Amsha3, Chapter 3. 



*|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Truteeye Amshe Truteeyo Adhyaayah ||** **|| Iti Sri Vishnu Chitteeye Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Truteeye Amshe **Truteeyo Adhyaayah ||** *****www.sadagopan.org  [[34]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



  
|| Atha Chaturtho Adhyaayah || ****Veda Shaakhaas*** *



Now, the Chapter 4. *Paraasharar* continues to explain in detail who did these *shaakhaas*, how *Vyaasa* appointed his *shishyaas*, made them do the *pravartana*, and their *shishyaas*. 


