+++
title = "04"

+++


## 1
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 1:  ****Sri Paraasharah - ****Aadyo vedah chatushpaadah shata sahasra sammitah | ****Tato dasha gunah krutsno yajnyo ayam sarvakaamadhuk || ***Sri Paraasharar *- *Veda * which was present as one unit initially, was divided into four; and then hundreds of thousands of branches afterwards. It has *dasha guna*. It can bestow any desire of anybody. Whatever you desire, you can get from the *Vedaas*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Aadya iti | Aadyah sarga aadou chaturmukhena avibhaktah pathitah | ****Chatushpaadah rugaadi roopena | Shata sahara iti ananta shaakhaa samudaaya ****roopah | Tatah tasmaat dasha guno yajnyah praavartata | Dashaguno ****dashavidhah, sa esha yajnyah panchavidho agnihotram darsha-poornamaasou ****chaaturmaasyaani pashubandhah soma iti | Tathaa \* Pancha vaa ete ****mahaayajnyaah \* iti upakramya \* devayajnyah pitruyajnyo bhootayajnyo ****manushyayajnyo brahmayajnyah \* iti shrutou vaitaarnikaa gaarhyaah cha dasha ****yajnyaah | \* Dravyam deshah phalam kaalo jnyaanam karma cha kaarakam | ****Shraddhaa avasthaa krutih nishthaah traigunyaah sarva eva hi iti bhaagavata ****ukta guna dashakavaan vaa, atra pakshe guna shabdo angavachanah | **During the creation, *Chaturmukha Brahma * had studied it as one single undivided unit. Then it was divided into four - *Rig, Yajus, Saama, Atharva*. Then, hundred thousand, not just hundred thousand, but it is *ananta*, innumerable number of branches. From the *Vedaas*, which was present as one unit, and divided into four, the *yajnya * having the ten qualities, or ten types of *yajnyaas*, were started, promulgated. *Dasha guna * means ten types, *dasha vidha*. Five kinds of *yajnyaas * are told to be the sacrificial ones - *Agnihotra, Darsha-poornamaasa *\(done during *Amaavaasya * and *Poornimaa*\), *Chaaturmaasya, Pashubandha *\(where *pashu * is offered as *bali*\), *Soma*. Similarly, there are five *mahaayajnyaas * also - *Devayajnya, **Pitruyajnya, Bhootayajnya, Manushyayajnya, Brahmayajnya. Vaitaarnika * are the sacrificial *yajnyaas*, and *Gaarhya * are what are done in the house. Ten *yajnyaas * are told; this is also one meaning for the *dasha guna*. The *yajnyaas * of ten types are created out of these *yajnyas * only. Not only these, there are ten qualities told - for the *yajnyaas. Yajnya * is offering of a *dravya * for a devataa; there is a particular place where it can be done \(desha\) ; specific fruits are mentioned for each one www.sadagopan.org  [[35]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



\(phalam\) ; *yajnyaas * can be done at specific times \(kaala\) only as prescribed in the *Shruti; jnyaana; karma * or activity; the *adhikaari * who performs the *yajnya*; faith; *avasthaa*. The ten qualities, *gunaas * are told in the *Bhaagavata. **Guna * means *anga*. Various desires are fulfilled by them.   


## 2
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 2:  ****Tato atra mat suto vyaaso ashtaavimshatame antare | ****Vedamekam chatushpaadam chaturdhaa vyabhajat prabhuh ||** *Vyaasa * who is my son, in the twenty-eighth *Dvaapara Yuga*, he made one *Veda * which was present as one unit, divided it into four.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Tata iti | Chaturdhaa ruk aadi roopena |** 





## 3
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 3:  ****Yathaa cha tena te vyastaa vedavyaasena dheemataa | ****Vedaah tathaa samastaih taih vyastaa vayaasaih tathaa mayaa || **Like I had done in the twenty-sixth *Dvaapara Yuga*, in the same way, every *Vyaasa * in the *Dvaapara*, they do the same act. *Bhagavaan * Himself comes and takes that form and does that.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Yathaa iti | Tathaa mayaa shadvimshe vyastaah |** 





## 4
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 4:  ****Tata anena eva vedaanaam shaakhaa bhedaan dvijottama | ****Chaturyugeshu rachitaan samasteshu avadhaaraya || ***Krishna Dvaipaayana Vyaasa*, who is none other than the *Amsha * of *Naaraayana*, in this current *Dvaapara Yuga*, in the series of *Chaturyugaas*, how the *shaakhaa **bhedaas * were created, that I will tell you, please do listen to me, very carefully, O *Maitreya*.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Tata iti | Anena vartamaanena naaraayanaamshena dvaipaayanena ****nidarshanabhootena samasteshu chaturyugeshu vedapaaragaih eva shaakhaa ****bhedaan rachitaan avadhaaraya iti arthah |** This is done by those who are experts in the *Vedaas*, who have mastered the *Vedaas*; how they created the various branches, for the various *Vedaas*; I am going to tell you those details now. 





## 5
This is a very famous *shloka*. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 5:  ****Krushnadvaipaayanam vyaasam viddhi naaraayanam prabhum | ****Ko hi anyo bhuvi maitreya mahaabaaratakrut bhavet ||** Know *Krishna Dvaipaayana * as *saakshaat Naarayana * only. O *Maitreya*, in this world, who else can create *Mahaabhaarata * which is such a wonderful work. www.sadagopan.org  [[36]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



  


## 6
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 6:  ****Tena vyastaa yathaa vedaah mat putrena mahaatmanaa | ****Dvaapare hi atra maitreya tat me shrunu yathaatatham ||** He tells his son as *Mahaatman. Paraasharar * gives utmost respect to his son *Vedavyaasa*. In this *Dvaapara*, my son who is most excellent, who divided the *Vedaas * into four, I am going to tell you as he did, please do listen to me. 





## 7
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 7:  ****Brahmanaa chotidoo vyaaso vedaan vyastum prachakrame | ****Atha shishyaan sa jagraaha chaturo vedapaaragaan || **Being told by *Brahma, Vyaasa * started to divide the *Vedaas * into four. Four *shishyaas * who were all experts in *Vedaas*, he took them. *Veda * was present as one unit, and they had all studied that *Veda*.   


## 8
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 8:  ****Rugveda paathakam pailam jagraaha sa mahaamunih | ****Vaishampaayana naamaanam yajurvedasya cha aagraheet ||** In order to promulgate the *Rig Veda*, he took *Paila * as his shishya. For *Yajur Veda*, he took *Vaishampaayana*, as the one responsible for promulgation of the *Yajur **Veda*. 





## 9
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 9:  ****Jaiminam saamavedasya tathaa eva atharvavedavit | ****Sumantuh tasya shishyo abhoot vedavyaasasya dheematah || **For *Saama Veda*, he took *Jaimini*, and for *Atharva Veda*, he took *Sumantu*. 



*Veda Vyaasa * took *Paila, Vaishampaayana, Jaimini * and *Sumantu * for promulgation of the four *Vedaas, Rig, Yajus, Saama, Atharva*.   


## 10
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 10:  ****Romaharshana naamaanam mahaabuddhim mahaamunih | ****Sootam jagraaha shishyam sa itihaasa puraanayoh ||** *Romaharshana * who was a *soota*, was a very brilliant person; great sage *Vyaasa * took him for *Itihaasa * and *Puraana*. In order to teach *Itihaasa * and *Puraana*, one needs to have excellent brilliance; they should teach it as it existed. Events have to be narrated as they existed. It is said that the person who is telling and person who is listening, for them, it should create horripilation, *romaanchana*. That is why he is called *Romaharshana * himself. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Romaharshana iti | \* Aarsham bahuvidhaakhyaanam devarshi charitaashrayam | ****Itihaasa iti proktam bhavishyat bhootakarmagam | ***Itihaasa * is said as *iti ha aasa*; what existed previously, in olden times. But here the meaning is that it contains everything which is going to happen in future. These are contained in *itihaasa*. It is *rishi prokta*. It is told in many ways, and it is www.sadagopan.org  [[37]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



the *aacharanaa * of all the *Devarshis*, what all they did.   


## 11
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 11:  ****Eka aaseet yajurvedah tam chaturdhaa vyakalpayat | ****Chaaturhotram abhoot tasmin tena yajnyam atha akarot ||** *Yajurveda * itself was one, and he made it into four. It is called *Chaaturhotra*, and there are four *ritviks*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Eka iti | Yajurvede hi adhvaryu kriyaa baahulyaat yajana saadhanatvaat cha ****yajuh praachuryaat sarvo api vedo yajuh iti uktam | \* Yat shishtam tu ****yajurvede tena yajnyam ayunjata | Yajanaat hi yajurveda iti shaastrasya ****nishchayah iti vaayu ukteh | Adhvaryu udgaatru hotru brahmaakhya ****chaturhotru kartrukam karma chaaturhotram tat chaturdhaa krute vede ****aabhoot | Tena karmanaa yajnyam akarot praavartayat | ***Adhvaryu * is the expert in *Yajurveda*, who is responsible for the *Yajurveda **mantraas*, the performance of the *karma*. Whatever the *adhvaryu * has to do, those *mantraas * are all in the *Yajurveda*. This is the main part of the *Yaaga*. The entire *Veda * is said to be *Yajurveda * only here. *Yajurveda * only was there. This is because *Yajur mantraas * are abundant, and are the main *mantraas * for performance of the *karmaas*. *Yajanaat hi yajurvedah. Vaayu Puraana * says that. In the four divisions of the *Vedaas*, the various *mantraas*, which are recited by four *ritviks*, called *Adhvaryu, Udgaatru, Hotru, Brahma - Adhvaryu * is responsible for the *Yajurveda mantraas, Hotru * is for the *Rigveda mantraas, Udgaatru * is for *udgaana *- the *Saama Veda mantraas*, and *Brahma * is supposed to know all the three and also the *Atharvana Veda*. These are four, and so it is called *Chaaturhotra*. With these *karmaas, yajnya * was promulgated.   


## 12
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 12:  ****Aadhvaryavam yajurbhih tam rugbhih houtram tathaa munih | ****Oudgaatram saamabhih chakre brahmatvam cha api atharvabhih ||** In one unit of *Veda*, all these *mantraas * are there. *Yajurveda mantraas * are those with which the *Adhvaryu * does the performance of the *karma*, this is called *Aadhvaryava*. The *mantraas * which an *Adhvaryu * says to perform the *karma * are *Aadhvaryava*. Whatever *hotru * says is *Houtra*. The *Houtra mantraas, **Rig mantraas * were all taken out. The *Oudgaatru mantraas * were collected together, which were having all the *Saama mantraas*. The *Houtra mantraas * were collected together, the *Rig mantraas. Aadhvaryava mantraas * were collected together, which are *Yajur mantraas*. 



The word *api * means that initially *Vedaas * were only three. It is told as *Vedaah **trayee, Rig, Yajus * and *Saama Veda*. And *Atharva Veda * was added later. *Brahma * is one who knew all the three. Or, *Brahma * is the one who also knew the *Atharva **Veda*.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: **www.sadagopan.org  [[38]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



**Etat eva prapanchayati aadhvaryam iti | Brahmatvam cha api atharvabhih iti | ****Atra api shabdena trayee samuccheeyate, brahmatvashabdena ****brahmaartvijyam purohita krutyam cha uchyate, \* Namo brahmana iti ****trishkrutvo brahmane namaskaroti \* iti shruteh purohitasya brahma shabda ****vaachyatvaat | Ayam arthah, \* Atha kena brahmatvam kriyata iti trayyaa ****vidyayaa \* iti braahmanaat \* yajnyam vyaakhyaasyaamasya tribhih vedaih ****vidheeyate \* iti sootraat cha brahmakrutyam tribhih vedaih chakre | Tathaa ****aatharvana uktam raajnyaam shaantika poushtika aabhichaarikaadi pourohita ****krutyam atharvabhih chakra iti tam chaturdhaih iti uktam |** How the *Chaaturhotra * is done is explained here. Here, *api * means *trayee - Rig, **Yajus * and *Saama. Brahmatva * means *brahmaartvijya*, the *Ritvik Brahma*, whatever he does. It is generally done in *karmaas - Namo Brahmane, Namo astu Agnaye, **Namah Pruthivye, Nama Oshadhibhyah namo vaache... *– this is repeated three times and thus for *Brahma*, we do *namah * three times, therefore the *trayee * is told. *Braahmana * says that *Brahmatva * is done with all the three *Vedaas - Rig, **Yajus * and *Saama*. All the three collected is the function of the *Brahma*. There is a *sootra * which says that *Brahmatva * is told with three *Vedaas*. For the sovereigns, whatever *karmaas * are told - the *shaanti **karmaas, poushtika karmaas * and *aabhichaarika karmaas*, all of these *karmaas * are in the *Atharva Veda*, and because of this, it became four.   


## 13
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 13:  ****Tatah sa rucha uddhrutya rugvedam krutavaan munih | ****Yajoomshi yajurvedam saamavedam cha saamabhih ||** He collected the *mantraas * which are *Hotra mantraas*, from *Rig Veda*, the *Rung **mantraas*, and that collection of *mantraas*, became *Rig **Veda * itself. *Yajur mantraas * were all pulled out, and *Yajur Veda * was made. *Saama **mantraas * which the *udgaataa * does the *gaana*, was taken out and *Saama Veda * was made.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Chaaturvidyam prapanchayati - tatah sa iti | Tatah - vedasamudaayaat |** 





## 14
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 14:  ****Raajnyaama cha atharvavedena sarvakarmaani cha prabhuh | ****Kaarayaamaasa maitreya brahmatvam cha yathaasthiti || **All the *karmaas * of the sovereigns was taken out as *Atharva Veda*. Without exceeding what is told in the *shaastraas*, the *Brahmatva * was also created with the *Atharva Veda mantraas*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Raajnyaam iti | Yathaa sthiti shaastra maryaadaa anatikramena | **





## 15
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 15:  ****So ayam eko mahaavedataruh tena pruthak krutah | ****Chaturdhaa atha tato jaatam vedapaadapakaananam || **www.sadagopan.org  [[39]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



A huge tree of *Veda*, was separated into four. The *Veda * tree got divided into four, and that into multiple branches, it became a huge neverending forest of *Vedaas*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****So ayam iti | Tatah prutak krutebhyah, ananta shaakhaatvmaka veda paadapa ****kaananam jaatam | **The innumerable branches, the forest of *Veda * tree was created from that.   


## 16
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 16:  ****Bibheda prathamam vipra pailo rugveda paadapam | ****Indrapramitaye praadaat baashkalaaya cha samhite ||** For *Rigveda*, he had taken *Paila * as the *shishya*, and he divided *Rigveda * further. The *Samhitaas * he gave to *Indrapramiti * and *Baashkala*, the two *shishyaas*. 





## 17
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 17:  ****Chaturdhaa sa bibhedaatha baashkalo api cha samhitaam | ****Bodhaadibhyo dadou taah cha shishyebhyah sa mahaamunih || **Then, *Baashkala * who learnt the *Samhitaa*, he again divided into four. He gave it to *Bodhya * and others.   


## 18
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 18:  ****Bodhyaagnimaadhakou tadvat yaajnyavalkya paraasharou | ****Pratishaakhaah tu shaakhayaah tasyaah aaste jagruhuh mune ||** These are the four *shishyaas * to whom *Baashkala * taught further - *Bodhya, **Agnimaadhaka, Yaajnyavalkya * and *Paraashara*. They mastered all the *pratishaakhaas * of this *Samhitaa shaakhaa*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Bodhyaagnimaadhakou tadvat iti | Tasyaah baashkala samhitaayaah | **This is for the *Baashkala Samhitaa*. 





## 19
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 19:  ****Indrapramitih ekaam tu samhitaam svasutam tatah | ****Maandukeyam mahaatmaanam maitreyua adhyapayat tadaa || ***Indrapramiti*, who had also learnt the *Samhitaa*, taught it to his own son, *Maandukeya*, who was a great sage, *mahaatmaa*.   


## 20
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 20:  ****Tasya shishya prashishyebhyah putrashishyakramaat yayou |** From there, from student to student, student to student, and also to sons, *shishya * and *prashishya*, and so on, *Veda * was taught to many people everywhere.   


## 21
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 21:  ****Vedamitrah tu shaakalyah samhitaam taam adheetavaan | ****Chakaara samhitaah pancha shishyebhyah pradadou cha taah ||** www.sadagopan.org  [[40]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



*Vedamitra * who was also called as *Shaakalya*, also learnt that *Samhitaa *- the *Indrapramiti Samhitaa*. He further divided it into five parts, and taught it to his students further. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Veda mitrah iti | Taam indrapramiti samhitaam shaakalyah panchadhaa krutvaa ****mudgalaadinyah adaat | **Taught to *Mudgala * and others whose names will be told now. 





## 22
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 22:  ****Tasya shishyaah tu ye pancha teshaam naamaani me shrunu | ****Mudgalo gomukhah cha eva vaatsyashaaleeya eva cha | ****Shaishirah panchamah cha aaseet maitreya sumahaamatih || **I am going to tell you the names of those five students, *Mudgala, Gomukha, **Vaatsya, Shaaleeya, Shaishira. Shaishira*, the fifth one, had great wisdom.   


## 23
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 23:  ****Samhitaa tritayam chakre shaakapoornah tathaa itarah | ****Niruttamakarot tadvat chaturtham munisattama ||** *Shaakalya's * fellow students, who were also studying with the same master, also studied the *Indrapramiti samhitaa*. The name is told as *Shaakapoorna*. He made it into three *Samhitaas * and also created *Nirukta*, which has the *Veda shabda **nirvachanaas*.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Samhitaa iti | Taam eva shaakalya sabrahmachaaree shaakapoornah tridhaa ****krutvaa krounchaadibhyo adaat | Veda shabda nirvachana roopam ****niruktaakhyam vedaangam cha krutvaa niruktaakyaaya aadaat |** He creates *Nirukta*, which contains how to understand the derivations of the *Vedic * words. *Nirukta * is a *Vedaanga*.   


## 24
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 24:  ****Krouncho vaitaalikah tadvat baalakah cha mahaamunih | ****Niruktah cha chaturtho abhoot vedavedaangapaaragah ||** He took four *shishyaas, Krouncha, Vaitaalika, Baalaka, Nirukta*. These are great sages who had mastered the *Veda * and *Vedaangaas * also. To these four *shishyaas*, he taught the *Indrapramiti Samhitaa*, and also *Nirukta*.   


## 25
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 25:  ****Iti etaah pratishaakhaabhyo hi anushaakhaa dvijottama | ****Baashkalih cha aparaah tisrah samhitaah krutavaan dvija ||** This *Samhitaa*, another fellow student of *Shaakalya*, who is known as *Baashkali*, he further divided into three *Samhitaas*, which are *anushaakhaas*. 



*Shaakhaa, Pratishaakhaa, Anushaakhaa*, like this, it started to grow, these *Vedic * branches. This huge tree of *Veda*, with innumerable number of www.sadagopan.org  [[41]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



branches, became a huge forest.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Iti iti | Taam eva anyah shaakalya sabrahmachaaree baashkalih tisra samhitaah ****krutavaan | Tasya shishyaah kaalaayanyaadayah tebhyo adaat iti arthah |** *Baashkali * is a *shishya*, who was also studying along with *Shaakalya *- he made it into three *Samhitaas*, and taught it to *Kaalayani, Gaargya * and *Kathaajava*. They further promulgated. 





## 26
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 4, Shloka 26:  ****Iti ete bahvruchaah proktaah samhitaa yaih pravartitaah || **Those who promulgated these *Samhitaas * and created *shaakhaas, pratishaakhaas*, were all called as *Bahvruchaas*. 



In this way, to their sons, *shishyaas, prashishyaas*, the *Vedic * branches were promulgated, in innumerable ways to all the *adhikaaris*. They were all called *Bahvruchaas*. 



This completes the *Amsha * 3, Chapter 4. 



*|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Truteeye Amshe Chaturtho Adhyaayah || ** **|| Iti Sri Vishnu Chitteeye Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Truteeye Amshe **Chaturtho Adhyaayah || ** *** **www.sadagopan.org  [[42]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



  
|| Atha Panchamo Adhyaayah || ****Yaajnyavalkya’s Story, Shukla Yajurveda** * ** *Now, Chapter 5. 



*Paraasharar * is going to tell the story of how the *saakshaatkaara * of *Shukla **Yajurveda * was done by *Yaajnyavalkya*, and also *Vaishmpaayana's * story. How the *Shukla Yajurveda * was taught by *Surya * to *Yaajnyavalkya*, which we will see next. We are studying about how the *Vedaas * which were existing as one huge unit, were divided into four by *Vedavyaasa*. He accepted four *shishyaas, Paila * for *Rigveda, **Vaishampaayana * for *Yajurveda, Jaimini * for *Saamaveda, Sumantu * for *Atharvaveda*. How the four *Vedaas * were formed was also told. Though it is told as *Veda trayee*, the three *Vedaas*, one explanation given is that three kinds of *mantraas, **Adhvaryava, Houtra*, and *Oudgaatru mantraas*, were all taken from one big unit of *Vedaas * separately. Those which are used by the *Adhvaryu*, for performing the *yaagaas*, those which are used by the *Hotru*, and those which are used by the *Udgaatru*, were all taken out from one single *Veda*, which existed as one unit, and were named as *Yajurveda, Rigveda * and *Saamaveda*. Later on, the fourth *Veda * was also formed, picking up the other *mantraas*, which are used for the various *karmaas * of kings, like *Shaantika, Poushtika, Aabhichaarika*. Though four *ritviks * are there in all *yaagaas, Adhvaryu, Hotru, Udgaatru*, and *Brahma*, three kinds of *mantraas * are prominently used by the three *ritviks *- these are the *Adhvaryu mantraas, Hotru mantraas * and *Udgaatru mantraas*. This is one explanation given for the *trayee. Brahma * is the one who has studied the *Atharva **Veda*, and he also knows the other three *prayogaas*, he is supposed to be one of the *ritviks * for all the *yaagaas*. How the *prachaara * and *pravartana * of *Rigveda * was done, starting with *Paila * and all the *shishyaas, Indrapramiti, Baashkala * and all others, and it grew into innumerable number of branches, through *shishyaas, prashishyaas*, their sons, and it started getting multiple branches. It grew into a huge tree. This was all seen in *Amsha * 3, Chapter 4. In the current Chapter 5, *Paraasharar * continues to talk about how *Yajurveda **prachaara * was done. And then the *Saamaveda * and then *Atharva Veda*. While telling the *Yajurveda shaakhaa*, there is a small story which comes, about *Yaajnyavalkya * and *Vaishampaayana * which *Sri Paraasharar * tells. 
