+++
title = "05"

+++


**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 1: ****Sri Paraasharah - ****Yajurveda taroh shaakhaah saptavimshan mahaamunih | ****Vaishampaayana naama asou vyaasashishyah chakaara vai ||** www.sadagopan.org  [[43]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





27 *shaakhaas*, branches of *Yajurveda*, were done by *Vaishampaayana * who was *shishya * of *Vyaasa*. There are 27 main branches in *Yajurveda*. The tree of *Yajurveda * was divided into main branches. *Vyaasa's shishya, Vaishampaayana*, who was taken as *shishya * for promulgation of *Yajurveda*, created 27 main *shaakhaas*. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Yajurveda taroh iti | Saptavimshati yajushah pradhaana shaakhaah | ****Brahmaanda uktah shadasheeti pakshah tat pratishaakhaa vivakshayaa | Taah ****cha kaanvaadi shukla yajuh panchadashakam cha samhatya eka shatam ****adhvaryu shaakhaah aapastambha uktaah syuh |** 27 *shaakhaas * told here are the main *shaakhaas * of *Yajurveda. Brahmaanda **Puraana * tells about 86 *shaakhaas*. Among the 27 main *shaakhaas*, these are the sub-branches. *Shukla Yajurveda * which is going to be told now, how *Yaajnyavalkya * obtained the *Shukla Yajurveda*, that is about *Kaanva * and other *shaakhaas*, and this is 15 *shaakhaas*. 86 and 15 put together, 101 is said to be the *Yajurveda shaakhaas*. This is how *Aapastambha Rishi * says. In the *Brahmaanda Puraana*, it is told that 86 branches are there. That means that these main branches have sub branches. *Shukla Yujurveda*, has *Kaanva * and other branches, totally 15 branches. This becomes 86 \+ 15 = 101, which is said to be the count of *Yajurveda shaakhaas*. It has the *mantraas * used by the *adhvaryu * in any *karma*. Out of these, 27 are the main branches created by *Vaishampaayana. Aapastambha rishi * has told that there are 101 branches in the *Yajurveda*. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 2: ****Shishyebhyah pradadou taah cha jagruhuh te api anukramaat |** He taught it to various students. They all mastered those parts. He taught all those 27 *shaakhaas * to various *shishyaas*, and they all mastered the *Samhitaas*. 







**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 3: ****Yaajnyavalkyah tu tatra abhoot brahmaraatosuto dvija | ****Shishyah paramadharmajnyo guruvruttiparah sadaa ||** *Brahmaraata's * son *Yaajnyavalkya * was one of the *shishyaas * of *Vaishampaayana*, who learnt *Krishna Yajurveda * from *Vaishampaayana*. He was very devoted to serving his master *Vaishampaayana*; he was a *parama dharmajnya*, following the *dharma*, and very knowledgeable.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 4: ****Rishih yo adya mahaa meroh samaaje na aagamishyati | ****Tasya vai sapta raatraah tu brahmahatyaa bhavishyati ||** www.sadagopan.org  [[44]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



At that time, there was a conference of all *rishis * which was organized, in the *Meru **parvata*, and if someone does not come there, within seven days, they will get affected by *Brahmahatyaa dosha*.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Rishih iti | Adya asmin dine | **





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 5: ****Poorvamevam muniganaih samayo yah kruto dvija | ****Vaishampaayana ekah tu tam vyatikraantavaan tadaa || **This was agreed upon by all the groups of *rishis*, earlier itself. For some reason, *Vaishampaayana * could not go to that assembly, of all the *munis*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 6: ****Svastreeyam baalakam so atha padaa sprushtam ataadayat ||** His sister's child was lying down, and accidentally, *Vaishampaayana * stepped on the child. His foot touched the child, and the child died immediately. 



Because of this, he got *Brahma hatyaa dosha*, and because of this, he had to do some *vrataas*, to get rid of that *dosha*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 7: ****Shishyaan aaha cha bhooh shishyaa brahmahatyaapaham vratam | ****Charadhvam matkrute sarve na vichaaryam idam tathaa ||** He asked all the *shishyaas * to perform some *vrata*, due to which he will get rid of his *Brahma hatyaa dosha*. The *vrata * which will get rid of the *brahmahatyaa dosha*, please implement that, for my sake do all of these, and no one should question these. *Shishyaas * have to follow whatever the *aachaarya * says. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Yat gurunaa kaaryam tat tasya putra shishyaadibhih api kaaryam iti bhaavena ****aaha shishyaan iti |** Whatever an *aachaarya * has to do, that, the sons and *shishyaas * are also supposed to do.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 8: ****Atha aaha yaajnyavalkyah tu kimebhih bhagavaan dvijaih | ****Kleshitaih alpatejobhih charishye aham idam vratam ||** At that time, *Yaajnyavalkya * says, O *Aachaarya*, what is the use of having all these *shishyaas * of yours, I will do it alone. They are all very troubled, and do not have the proper capability and the *tejas * required. Why do we need all the *shishyaas*, I can do it alone and make you get rid of the *Brahmahatyaa dosha*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 9: ****Tatah kruddho guruh praaha yaajnyavalkyam mahaamunim | ****Muchyataam yat tvayaa adheetam matto vipraavamaanaka || **www.sadagopan.org  [[45]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



Then *Vaishampaayana rishi * gets very angry, and he tells the great sage *Yaajnyavalkya *- "You have insulted all the other *Brahmins*, all the other *shishyaas * of mine, and whatever you have learnt, just throw it out". 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 10: ****Nistejaso vadasyenaan yat tvam braahmana pungavaan | ****Tena shishyena naartho asti mama aajnyaa bhanga kaarinaa || **They are all *shreshtha braahmanaas*, excellent *Brahmins*, and you are telling that they are without any power, *tejas*, capability. You have insulted them. Whatever you have learnt from me, throw it out and leave. That student who does not follow my orders, I have no use of him, I do not want him here. Whatever you have learnt from me, give it back.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 11: ****Yaajnyavalkyah tatah praaha bhaktyaa etat te mayaa uditam | ****Mama api alam tvayaa adheetam yanmayaa tad idam dvija ||** *Yaajnyavalkya * says - "I told you only because of the utter devotion I have in you and not to insult the other *Brahmins*. This is enough for me. I have learnt enough from you, and do not want what I have learnt from you", and he throws it out.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Yaajnyavalkyah iti | Mama api tvayaa alam na artho asti iti arthah |** I don't have any more use. I don't need anything else. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 12: ****Sri Paraasharah - ****Iti uktvaa rudhiraaktaani saroopaani yajoomshi sah | ****Chardayitvaa dadou tasmai yayou cha sva icchayaa munih ||** *Sri Paraasharar *- All the *Yajurvedaas * which he had learnt, he vomited. It was mixed with blood and other things, and it had a form. He vomited whatever he had learnt in the form of some substance mixed with blood. And he went out.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Iti uktvaa iti | Iti uktvaa svaroopaani moortaani |** It was a solid substance. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 13: ****Yajoomshi atha visrushtaani yaajnyavalkyena vai dvija | ****Jagruhuh tittiraa bhootvaa taittireeyaah tu te tatah || **All the *Yajurveda mantraas * which were vomited by *Yaajnyavalkya*, all the other *shishyaas*, they took the form of *Tittiri * birds, and ate all the *Yajurveda **mantraas * which were thrown out by him, mixed with his blood. They were all known as *Taittiriyaas*. This *shaakhaa * became known as *Taittiriya shaakhaa*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Yajoomshi iti | Yaajnyavalkya vyatirikta shishyaah charditam vipraroopena **www.sadagopan.org  [[46]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



**gruheetum anuchitam iti tittiree bhootaa jagruhuh | **All the *shishyaas * other than *Yaajnyavalkya*, they were all *Brahmins*, and thought that it is not right for them to consume what was mixed with blood and thrown out like that; it was not pure for them to consume like that. They took the form of *Tittiri * birds and then consumed it. Because it was the sacred *Yajurveda **mantraas*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 14: ****Brahmahatyaa vratam cheernam gurunaa choditaih tu yaih | ****Chakruh aadhvaryavam te tu charanaam munisattama || **After that, they adopted all the *vrataas, Brahmahatyaa vrataas*, and he got rid of all the *Brahmahatyaa dosha*, as ordered by their *aachaarya, Vaishampaayana*. They performed the *vrata * as per his order. They did all the *vrataas * with *Adhvaryu **mantraas*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Brahmahatyaa iti | Cheernam charitam | Adhvaryavah ****yajusshaakhaadhyaayinah | Yajus shaakhaadhyaanaat adhvaryutvam | **They put it to practice. They are called *Adhvaryus*, those who study the *Yajurveda*. They became *Adhvaryus * because of studying the *Yajurveda*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 15: ****Yaajyavalkyo api maitreya praanaayaama paraayanah | ****Tushtaava pranatah sooryam yajoomshi abhilashamstatah ||** *Yaajnyavalkya * started doing *yoga, praanaayaama*. He wanted to again master the *Yajurveda*, he worshipped *Soorya * with *praanaayaama * and all the yoga practices. He prayed to *Soorya * thus.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Yaajnyavalkya iti | Yajoomshi vaishampaayanaat adheetaani |** Whatever he had studied from *Vaishampaayana*, desiring that again, he does *upaasanaa * of *Soorya*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 16: ****Yaajnyavalkyah - ****Namassavitre dvaaraaya mukteh amitatejase | ****Rug yajus saama bhootaaya trayeedhaamne cha te namah ||** *Yaajnyavalkya *- I pay obeisance to *Soorya, Savitru devataa*, one who impels the whole world, and is the path for *Moksha*. Who has got immense effulgence. He is the personification of *Rig, Yajus, Saama*. He is the form of these three *Vedaas*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 17: ****Namo agnishoma bhootaaya jagatah kaaranaatmane | ****Bhaaskaraaya param tejah soushumna ruchi bibhrate ||** *Agni * is the cause of heat. *Shoma * is for rains. The Sun who is nothing but *Agni * and *Shoma*, I do *namaskaara * to that Sun. He is said to be the cause of the www.sadagopan.org  [[47]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



world. He throws away the rays which nurture all the plants and trees.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Nama iti | Agnishoma aatmatvam aatapa vrushti hetutvaat | Kaaranaatmane \* ****Yaabhih aadityah tapati rashmibhih \* iti prakriyayaa | Soushumnam ****somaposhakam amrutam |** Because of his rays only, and because he is burning bright, all the rain and other things happen. He is the cause of heat and rain. That is why he is said to be the cause of the world. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 18: ****Kalaa kaashthaa nimeshaa aadi kaala samjyaatmane namah | ****Dhyeyaaya vishnuroopaaya parama akshara roopine || **Because of the Sun only, all the divisions in time are established - *kalaa, **kaashthaa, nimeshaa*, and others. I pay obeisance to the Sun. Who is the cause of all these time divisions. One who is the object of meditation. You are the form of *Vishnu * only. And *Pranava*.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Kalaa iti | Kaala samjyaatmane kaalasya sanjyaapanaaya | Kaala jnyaana ****aatmana iti cha paathah | Parama aksharam pranavah, \* Omiti prastutya \* Etat ****paramam aksharam \* iti shruteh |** He is the one who causes all the divisions in time. He is the *Pranava roopi. **Shruti * says, starting with *Om*, is the *Pranava*. This is the *Parama akshara*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 19: ****Bibharti yah suraganaan aapyaaya indum sva rashmibhih | ****Svadhaa amrutena cha pitruun tasmai dhrutyaatmane namah || **He supports all the hosts of *devataas*. He pleases *Chandra * with all his rays. He satisfies all the *pitrus*, and causes them happiness.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Bibharti iti | Dhrutyaatmane dhaarayitre | Truptyaatmana iti cha paathah |** He bears everyone, he is the support of everyone. He causes *trupti * to everyone. For *devataas * also, he causes *trupti*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 20: ****Himaambu dharma vrushteenaam kartaa bhartaa cha yah prabhuh | ****Tasmai trikaala roopaaya namah sooryaaya vedhase ||** The cold season, the summer, rains, he is the cause of all those things. He is the Lord, the supporter and the one who causes heat, rains, cold season. He is the very form of the three times, he is the all knowing *Soorya*. I pay obeisance to him.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 21: ****Apahanti tamo yah cha jagato asya jagatpatih | ****Sattvadhaamadharo devo naamstasmai vivasvate ||** www.sadagopan.org  [[48]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



One who dispels all the darkness of the world. He is the Lord of the world. You have the effulgence, the *Sattva*, and is shining with brilliance. I pay obeisance to *Vivasvaan, Soorya*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 22: ****Satkarmayogyo na jano naivaapah shuddhikaaranam | ****Yasmin anudite tasmai namo devaaya bhaasvate || **If Sun does not rise in the morning, people cannot do their *nitya naimittika **karmaas * itself. *Trikaala Sandhyaavandanaa * will not be possible. None of the *karmaas * can be performed. People will become ineligible to do all the *karmaas*. Water gets the quality of causing purity to others, and this comes from the Sun. If the Sun does not rise, all these things cannot happen. I pay obeisance to that *Soorya*. 



We say water is pure, take well water and do *shuddhi * for all the objects.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 23: ****Sprushto yat amshubhih lokah kriyaa yogyo abhijaayate | ****Pavitra kaarana aatmaaya tasmai shuddhaatmane namah ||** Because of his rising, all his rays come and touch the whole world. Because of that only, all activity happens in this world. If there is no light, there is no activity. He is the one who causes purity in everything. That Sun, who by himself is *Shuddha **aatmaa*, very pure, I pay obeisance to him. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Sprushta iti | Pavitra karana aatmane iti cha paathah | Pavitra karana ****aatmaaya iti paathe aanandatvam aarsham | **





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 24: ****Namah savitre sooryaaya bhaaskaraaya vivasvate | ****Aadityaaya aadibhootaaya devaadeenaam namo namah || **I pay obeisance to *Savitru Deva*, who is the foremost among the *devaas*.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Namah iti | Savitaa - prerakah | Shu prerane iti dhaatoh savitaa iti roopa ****nishpattih | Sooryo janakah \* Sooyate raa iti niruktih | Vivasvaan - tamaso ****vinaashakah |** One who impels everyone. The word *Savitaa * is formed from the root *shu*. He is the one who brings wealth to everyone. Because he destroys darkness, he is called *Vivasvaan*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 25: ****Hiranmayam ratham yasya ketavo amrutavaajinah | ****Vahanti bhootaanaaloka chakshusham tam namaami aham ||** He is very pleasant in effulgence, and is very beautiful to look at. That is why it is called *Hiranmaya*. That kind of a chariot he has. His horses are all of the form www.sadagopan.org  [[49]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



of *prakrushta jnyaana*, of knowledge. They are eternal. The chariot of the Sun, who is like the eye for the whole world. I pay obeisance to him. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Hiranmayam iti | Hiranmayam atihita ramaneeya tejomayam | Ketavah ****prajnyaa roopaah | Amrutaah nityaah | **





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 26: ****Sri Paraasharah - ****Iti evam aadibhih tena stooyamaanasya vai ravih | ****Vaajiroopadharah praaha vreeyataam iti vaanchitam || ***Sri Paraasharar *- When he was being prayed to and worshipped by *Yaajnyavalkya*, he took on the form of a horse, and said that you can ask for any boon you want.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 27: ****Yaajnyavalkyah tadaa praaha pranipatya divaakaram | ****Yajoomshi taani me dehi yaani santi na me gurou ||** *Yaajnyavalkya * does *namaskaara * and then says - Teach me all the *Yajur mantraas*, which even my *aachaarya Vaishampaayana * does not have.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 28: ****Sri Paraasharah - ****Evamukto dadou tasmai yajoomshi bhagavaan ravih | ****Ayaatayaama sanjyaani yaani vetti na tadguruh ||** *Sri Paraasharar - Sooryadevataa * gave him all the *Yajur mantraas*, which even *Vaishampaayana * did not have. They are called *Ayaatayaamaas * which even his *guru Vaishampaayana * did not know. They got to be known as *Shukla **Yajurveda * afterwards.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 29: ****Yajoomshi yaih adheetaani taani vipraih dvijottama | ****Vaajinah te samaakhyaataah sooryo ashvah so abhavat yatah ||** Whoever *Brahmins * learnt these *Yajurveda mantraas * later on, they we called as *Vaajinah, Vaajasaneyee shaakhaa*. Because he took the form of a horse and taught these, those who studied this *shaakhaa * were called *Vaajis*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 5, Shloka 30: ****Shaakhaabhedaah tu eshaam vai dasha pancha cha vaajinaam | ****Kaanva aadyaah sumahaabhaaga yaajnyavalkyaah prakeertitaah ||** There are 15 *Vaajasaneya shaakhaas. Kaanva, Maadhyandina*, etc - all were known as *Yaajnyavalkya shaakhaas*. 



This is the story of *Yaajnyavalkya * and how the *Shukla Yajurveda * was obtained by him. 



This completes Chapter 5. www.sadagopan.org  [[50]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





*|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Truteeye Amshe Panchamo Adhyaayah || ** **|| Iti Sri Vishnu Chitteeye Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Truteeye Amshe Panchamo **Adhyaayah || *



****www.sadagopan.org  [[51]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



  
|| Atha Shashto Adhyaayah || ****Eighteen Puraanaas, Vidyaasthaanaas** 



Now, Chapter 6. ****
