+++
title = "07"

+++


**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 1: ****Maitreyah - ****Yathaavat kathiram sarvam yat prushtho asi mayaa guro | ****Shrotum icchaami aham tu ekam tat bhavaan prabraveetu me ||** *Maitreyar *- O *Paraasharar*, you told me everything that I requested for, as it is. Now, I am interested in one particular thing, which kindly do tell me. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Atha shrutyaadi ukto dharmo bhagavad aaraadhanatayaa anushtito ****nishreyasaaya iti etat artham yama bhata samvaadam prastouti yathaavat iti | ***Maitreyar * is asking about whatever *dharma * is told in the *Shrutis, Shrutis * and other *Upabrahmanaas*, that which is performed with the idea that it is worship of the Lord, *Bhagavaan*; and when the *anushthaana * is done like this, it leads to *Moksha*, and this is what he wants to know. Related to that, the dialogue which happens between *Yama * and his *bhata*, assistant, is being told here.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 2: ****Sapta dveepaani paataala veethayah cha mahaamune | ****Sapta lokaah cha ye antasthaa brahmaandasya asya sarvatah ||** You told about the 7 *dveepaas * and also the *paataala lokaas*. And also the *sapta **lokaas*, the *chaturdasha bhuvanaas * which are there inside the *Brahmaanda*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 3: ****Sthoolaih sookshmaih tathaa sookshma sookshmaih sookshamataraih tathaa | ****Sthoolaat sthoolataraih cha eva sarvam praanibhih aavrutam || **All the *chaturdasha bhuvanaas*, are populated with beings, some of whom are very fat and big, some are very subtle, some are more subtle than the subtle, still more subtle, those which are bigger than the big ones, like this, different kinds of beings are there in all these 14 worlds.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 4: ****Angulasya ashta bhaago api na sah asti munisattama | ****Na santi praanino yatra karma bandha nibandhanaah ||** What I have understood is that there is not even one-eighth part of an inch, which is not populated by such beings, embodied souls, which are all coming here and being born due to their *karmaas*. These fourteen worlds are so thickly populated. ****www.sadagopan.org  [[68]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 5: ****Sarve cha ete vasham yaanti yamasya bhagavan kila | ****Aayusho ante tathaa yaanti yaatanaah tat prachoditaah ||** All these are going to be controlled by *Yama*, and are going to be subjected to his rule. At the end of their life, they will go and suffer, with the sufferings subjected by the rule of *Yama*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 6: ****Yaatanaabhyah paribhrashtaa devaadyaasu atha yonishu | ****Jantavah parivartante shaastraanaam esah nirnayah || **After undergoing all the sufferings in the hells, they go to *devaloka*; they will take birth as *devaas*, etc. Like this, keep on going to *naraka, svarga*, etc. *Shaastraas * are telling all these details. So many innumerable beings are being born again and again. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 7: ****So aham icchaami tat shrotum yamasya vashavartinah | ****Na bhavanti naraa yena tat karma kathayasva me || **I want to know - by resorting to which *karma*, the beings do not get under the sway of *Yama*, that I want to know. By adopting which means they do not get into the suffering of *naraka, svarga*, etc., by which beings can get emancipation. 



After knowing all the fourteen *bhuvanaas*, how they were created, how people are there, what kind of people are there, what kind of *yuga dharmaas * are there, about all the *Vedaas * and everything, now he wants to know the means by which one can escape this *samsaara*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 8: ****Sri Paraasharah - ****Ayam eva mune prashno nakulena mahaatmanaa | ****Prushtah pitaamahah praaha bheeshmo yat tat shrunushva me ||** *Sri Paraasharar *- O *Maitreyar*, the same question was asked by *Nakula * to *Bheeshma*. Whatever *Bheeshma * told *Nakula*, that I am going to tell you. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Ayam iti | Ayam eva prashno nakulena bheeshmam prati prushtah; atah sah ****nakulaaya aaha iti anvayah | **



This is going to come now, which we see next. We will go into details about what *Bheeshmar * tells *Nakula*. 



In this session, we studied the details of the 18 *Puraanaas*, about how many *shlokaas * are there, how it is told in other *Puraanaas. Sri Engal Aalwaan * says that he is commenting on 6000 *shlokaas * of *Vishnu Puraana*. The 14 *dharmavidyaa **sthaanaas * were told, which are very important for us to study. Also www.sadagopan.org  [[69]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



the *upavedaas * were told. It was declared that the *Vedaas * are eternal, *nitya*. For creation, sustenance, dissolution, the one responsible God is Lord *Mahaavishnu * only; this is what is declared in all the 18 *Puraanaas*. Though there are different *shaakhaas * of the *Vedaas*, being studied in different *manvantaraas * and different *yugaas*, the eternality of *Veda * does not get affected. As a unit, *Vedaas * are one. Now, *Paraasharar * is going to tell about the means by which one can get liberation, to not come under the sway of *Yama*. We are in *Amsha * 3, Chapter 7, where *Maitreyar * told *Sri Paraasharar * that "You have told me everything that I have asked for, the 14 worlds in the *Brahmaanda*, the *sapta dveepaas*, and whatever is there inside this *Brahmaanda*, and all the kinds of beings who are here, starting with the most subtle to the most gross. I also understand that there are innumerable beings, in this *Brahmaanda*, who are all caught here in this *samsaara*, due to their past *karma*; and there is not even one-eighth of an inch, where we cannot find one living being. All these beings after dying, go to hell and then to heaven, and keep moving here, getting born again and again. Are there any beings who are not under the sway of *Yama*, who get rid of this *samsaara*, and get liberated; I would like to know about them." What *Maitreyar * really wants to know is the means to *Moksha*, the *Moksha dharma*, which is explained in the commentary. 



Now, *Paraasharar * starts to tell about the dialogue between *Yama * and his assistant, *bhata*. Finally he wants to tell about the dharma, the means which is told in *Shruti, Smruti, Itihaasa, Puraana*, which when performed with an idea of worship of *Bhagavaan*, will lead one to *Moksha*. So that one can escape from this *samsaara*, the cycle of birth and death, and get liberated. In order to tell about this, he starts with the *Yama bhata samvaada. Paraasharar * says what he heard from what *Bheeshmar * had told *Nakula*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 7: ****So aham icchaami tat shrotum yamasya vashavartinah | ****Na bhavanti naraa yena tat karma kathayasva me ||** Those who do not come under the sway of *Yama * but they escape from *samsaara*, what is that they should do, I want to know.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 8: ****Sri Paraasharah - ****Ayam eva mune prashno nakulena mahaatmanaa | ****Prushtah pitaamahah praaha bheeshmo yat tat shrunushva me ||** *Sri Paraasharar *- O *Maitreyar*, the same question was asked by *Nakula * to *Bheeshma; Bheeshmapitaamaha * answered him, and I will tell you what he told *Nakula*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Ayam iti | Ayam eva prashno nakulena bheeshmam prati prushtah; atah sah **www.sadagopan.org  [[70]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



**nakulaaya aaha iti anvayah | ***Nakula * had asked the very same question to *Bheeshma*; what *Bheeshma * told *Nakula*, I will tell you.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 9: ****Bheeshmah - ****Puraa mamaagato vatsa sakhaa kaalingako dvijah | ****Sa maam uvaacha prushto vai mayaa jaatismaro munih ||** *Bheeshma *- One *Brahmin * known to me came from *Kaalinga desha*, and that *muni* told me when I asked him this question. The *muni * by name *Jaatismara*, told *Kaalingaka * and *Kaalingaka * is telling *Bheeshma * that "I will tell you what that *muni * told me". 



The second *anvaya * is told by *Sri Engal Aalwaan * at the very end of this chapter. That interpretation is like this. There is a sage by name *Jaatismara*. The *Brahmin * from *Kaalinga desha * met me. When *Bheeshma * asked that *Kaalingaka **dvija*, he told *Bheeshma *- " *Mayaa jaatismaro munih*" is *Kaalingaka's * words. The *Kaalingaka Brahmin * says that "I had asked another *muni*, by name *Jaatismara * who told me this". This is the second *anvaya*. What *Bheeshma * is telling is " *Puraa mamaagato vatsa sakhaa kaalingako dvijah. Sa maam uvaacha". **"Prushto vai mayaa jaatismaro munih*" is what *Kaalingaka * is telling *Bheeshma*. The next few *shlokaas*, we have to understand that this is what the *muni * told *Kaalingaka*. 



So, there are two *anvayaas *- one, that a *muni * told *Kaalingaka*, and *Kaalingaka * told *Bheeshma*, and *Bheeshma * told *Nakula*. Another is that *Kaalingaka * himself is the *muni*, who told *Bheeshma*, and *Bheeshma * is telling *Nakula*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Sa kaalingako munih tvayaa prushtam imam artham mayaa prushto maam prati ****uvaacha iti aaha puraa iti | **There are two interpretations which come for this *shloka * and the *shloka * coming after this.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 10: ****Tena aakhyaatam idam sarvam ittham cha etat bhavishyati ****Tathaa cha tat abhoot vatsa yathaa uktam tena dheemataa ||** *Kaalingaka * is telling *Bheeshma * as *vatsa *- "That *muni * told me, whatever is going to happen, these are the things that are going to happen, everything happened exactly like that *muni * told". 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Svasya tam prati asya arthasya prashna-kaaranam tasya satyavaaditvam iti aaha ****tena iti | Idamittham, idaaneem sa deshaantare vartate, etat cha ittham ****bhavishyati, iti vyavahitam viprakrushtam cha tena yathaa aakhyaatam tat **www.sadagopan.org  [[71]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



**tathaa abhoot | ***Bheeshmar * is telling *Nakula *- Why did I ask this question to *Kaalingaka dvija*, because whatever I heard from him happened exactly like what he said, and I have realized that he says the truth. Whatever that *Kaalingaka * said, what he had heard from the *muni*, that this will happen like this, that this person will be in some other place at this time, this will happen like this in future, whatever is far away, and whatever is going to happen after a time gap, all that whatever he said, everything happened exactly like what he said.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 11: ****Sa prushtah cha mayaa bhooyah shraddhadhaanena vai dvijah | ****Yat yat aaha na tat drushtam anyathaa hi mayaa kvachit ||** That *muni*, whatever he told me, exactly the same thing happened. And I also asked him this question. After having got faith in what he says, I asked him some more things, and whatever he said, everything happened exactly like that.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 12: ****Ekadaa tu mayaa prushtam etat yat bhavatoditam | ****Praaha kaalingako viprah smrutvaa tasya muneh vachah ||** *Bheeshmar * to *Nakula *- Whatever you have asked, I had asked that *Kaalingaka **dvija*, and he remembered what that *muni * had told him, and he told me. 



That whatever he said, the *muni*, is the truth, and that he is a *trikaalajnyaani*.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Evam tasya pratyayitatvena tvayaa prushtam etat artha roopam mayaa prushtah ****pratyuvaacha iti aaha ekadaa iti | Kim pratyuvaacha iti apekshaayaam aaha ****smrutvaa iti |** After having made sure that whatever he told was true, whatever happened, whatever is going to happen, that is all true, I asked him the same question which you asked me, and he told me. This is what *Bheeshmar * is telling *Nakula*. He remembered what the *muni * had told, and *Kaalingaka dvija * told *Bheeshma*. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 13: ****Jaatismarena kathito rahasyah paramo mama | ****Yamakinkarayoh yo abhoot samvaadah tam braveemi te || **His name is *Jaatismara*, and he tells a secret teaching, which is not to be told to everyone. This happened in great secrecy between *Yama * and his *kinkara*. That dialogue I am going to tell you. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Jaati smarena iti | Tena jaati smarena yo yamakinkara samvaadah kathito ****abhoot tam samvaadam tasya muneh vachah smrutvaa te braveemi iti anvayah ****| **Remembering what he told, I am going to tell you. This is the most wonderful dialogue which *Kaalingaka * told *Bheeshma*, and *Bheeshma * tells *Nakula*. This is www.sadagopan.org  [[72]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



what *Paraasharar * is telling *Maitreyar*. 





This is an often quoted *pramaana * in all our *granthaas*. What happened between *Yama * and his *Bhata * is told here. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 14: ****Svapurusham abhveekshya paashastam vadati yamah kila tasya karnamoole | ****Parihara madhusoodana prapannaan prabhuh aham anya nrunaam na ****vaishnavaanaam ||** *Yama * sees his *bhata * who is having *paasha * in his hand, and will catch all the beings, who are supposed to come to *Yamaloka * after death. Seeing him, eye to eye, *Yama * tells in hushed voice in his ears so that nobody should hear. Those who have taken refuge in *Madhusoodana*, just leave them out. I am only lord of other beings. Those who have surrendered unto *Madhusoodana*, they are all *Vaishnavaas*, I am not the Lord for them. I have no control on them, just leave them out.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Sva purusham iti | Sva purusham ityaadi kaalinga vachanam |** *Kaalinga * is telling *Bheeshma. Bheeshmar * is telling *Nakula*. This is *Svapurusha *... 



**Parihara ityaadi yama vachanam |** *Parihara *... is what *Yama * told.   
Prabhubhih sva prabhaava bhanga sthaanam na prakaashyam iti neetyaa vishnu ****naama soochyaih ucchaariteshu naarakino api tat shravana aadinaa narakaan ****madhyeran tena sva adhikaara haanih iti bheetyaa cha karnamoole kathanam, ****'Raajadaaraan maagaah' iti vachanavat rahasi kathaneeyatvaat cha |** Masters should not make known to everyone, about things where they lose their powers. This is something which none of the masters or rulers would like to tell; they will not publicize their weaknesses publicly. Where they have no power, control, it is not to be told; this is the *raaja neeti*. Even if that *Vishnu naama * is pronounced loudly, those who are in hell, in *naraka*, also, by just listening to it, will escape from the *naraka*, and *Yama * will have nobody to rule over there; then he will lose his control over all of them; therefore he got scared, and that is why he is telling in hushed voice in the ear, the teachings which are told are "Don't have relations with the wives of kings", and things like that, are told in secrecy, the *raaja neeti*, which can lead to great difficulty. 



**Yamasya vaishnaveshu aprabhutve pramaanam \* Dravanti daityaah pranamanti ****devaah \* Prabhavo bhagavadbhaktaa maadrushaanaam ityaadi |** *Yama * does not have control on the *Vaishnavaas*, the *pramaanaas * are given for this - "Whenever someone sees a *Vaishnava*, all the *daityaas * will get liquefied, they will lose their powers; and *devaas * will do obeisance, do *namaskaara*", where *bhagavadbhaktaas * are lodged. *Yama * does not have any control over the *bhagavadbhaktaas*. 



*Yama * is looking at his *bhata * directly in the eye, in hushed voice, that only he www.sadagopan.org  [[73]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



should listen - "Don't ever go near *Madhusoodana prapannaas*, those who have surrendered to *Madhusoodana*, and the *Vaishnavaas*", and that he has no control over them.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 15: ****Aham amara \(ganaa\) varaarchitena dhaatraa yama iti lokahitaahite niyuktah | ****Hariguvashago asmi na svatantrah prabhavati samyamane mama api vishnuh ||** All the *devaas * worship the *Bhagavaan*. I have been told to look after both the good and the bad of the *devaas*. I am under the control of my Lord, *Hari; **Vishnu * controls me also. 



*Samyamana = samyak niyamana. Yama * is telling that *Vishnu * controls him also. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Atra hetum aaha - ahamiti | Dhaatraa eeshvarena, hita ahite hita pravartane ****ahita nivartane cha |** I have been brought to this place, given these powers and employed here, in order to make sure that all the worlds are doing the good, and to avoid *ahita* for the *lokaas*. This is my role, and *Bhagavaan * Himself has given me this position, *Hari * is my Lord, and I am under His control, I am not independent.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 16: ****Katakamakutakarnikaadi bhedaih kanakam abhedam api eeshyate yathaikam | ****Sura pashu manujaadi kalpanaabhih harih akhilaabhih udeeryate tathaa ekah ****||** Gold, and the various *aabharanaas*, or jewelleries made of gold, like *makuta, **karnika*, crown, bangles - they are all said to be golden only. When we see the different ornaments made with gold, we say that everything is golden only. In the same way, the gods, animals, humans, the variety that we see, *Hari * Himself is told; *Hari * is existing in all these forms, *deva, pashu, pakshi, manushya*; everything is *Hari * only, everything is *Bhagavadaatmaka*. 



The various ornaments made of gold are recognized as the same gold. In the same way, *Hari * who is the inner self of all the different kinds of forms that we see in this world, like *sura, pashu, manuja*, etc., the gods, animals, humans. He is the same inner self in all the beings, He is said to be the one *Hari * only. This is like *kaarya-kaarana sambandha*. As in the *Upanishads, "Ekena lohamaninaa sarvam **lohamayam syaat, ... lohamityeva satyam*", everything is said to be golden, golden bangle, golden crown, etc. In the same way, *Bhagavaan * is the *antaraatma * of everything. Knowing the golden nugget which is the cause, we can know all the effects of the gold; in the same way, *Hari * who is the *kaarana*, or cause of everything, is present as the inner self of all the beings; so everything is said to be *Bhagavadaatmaka*. The one *Hari * is present in everything as the Inner Self.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Vishnutva vivarana mukhena akhila aishwaryameva darshayati kataka iti | **www.sadagopan.org  [[74]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



**Abhedam bhedarahitam, taadaatmyavat | Yathaa kaarana bhootam kanakam ****kaarya bhoota kataka aadi taadaatmye api ekamishyate | Evam kaaranabhooto ****harih kaarya bhoota sura pashu manuja aadi bhedaih bhinne api tat ****aatmabhoota eka udeeryate | Kaaranatvena sarvatra ekasya eva vyaapya ****sthitatvaat sa eva eeshvara iti arthah |** Everything is His glory only. Whatever we see here, is *Bhagavaan **Vishnu's * glory, *aishvarya*. As though it is his identity, as though there is no difference. The golden nugget which is the cause, which is there in each ornament, but everything is told as the same gold, all are golden. In the same way, *Hari * who is the cause of everything, the various differences that we see as *sura, pashu, manuja *- He is the one inner self of everything. He is present in everything, pervading in everything being the sole Cause of everything. He is the Lord of all. *Yama * is telling that He is the Lord of everyone, and is also my Lord.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 17: ****Kshititala-paramaanavo anilaante punarapi yaanti yathaikataam dharitryaa | ****Sura-pashu-manujaadayah tathaante guna kalushena sanaatanena tena ||** All the dust which is there on the ground, when they get blown up with wind, and go up in the air, again they will become one with the earth after settling down. In the same way, all the different beings, *sura, pashu, manushya*, in the end go and merge into the *Bhagavaan*, become one with *Bhagavaan*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Atha tasya samhartrutvam aaha kshititala iti | Anilaante utthaapaka anila ****avasaane, kalusham kaalushyam, eeshvara sankalpa kruta guna vaishamyena ****utthaapitaah suraadayah tasya guna kaalushyasya naashe tamah shareerena ****tena sanaatanena ekataam yaanti | **In the previous *shloka, kaaranatva * was told. Here, *samhartrutva * is told. He is the one who withdraws everything unto Himself during *pralaya*, or when the beings die. Wind blows and throws up all the dust. *Sura, nara, pashu*, are all created during *srushti * by *Bhagavaan*; during *srushti*, the *avyakta*, which is the *nitya **dravya*, is present always, as *pradhaana*, this is the unmanifest *achetana *- this is made of three *gunaas - sattva, rajas, tamas*. When all three *sattva, rajas, **tamas * are in equal proportion, *pralaya * happens. When any one of them becomes more or less, immediately at that point, creation happens. This is like a huge ocean, where at some place there is a tide, some place there is a bubble, this huge prakruti, *moola prakruti * or *pradhaana, avyakta*, at some place, *sattva, rajas, **tamas * become uneven, due to *Bhagavat sankalpa; Bhagavaan * does *sankalpa*, because *achetana * cannot act by itself, it has not *jnyaatrutva, kartrutva*. Due to *Bhagavat sankalpa*, if there is difference in the *sattva, rajas, tamas * proportion, immediately there is creation, *mahat, ahamkaara, tanmaatraas, panchabhootaas, **deha, indriya*, and all the *deva, manushya, pashu*, are all created. This is *srushti*. During *pralaya*, the unevenness in *sattva, rajas, tamas * will be destroyed, and *prakruti * becomes equal. Everything will merge in the backward order - *pancha **bhootaas * will merge into *tanmaatraas*, which merge into *ahamkaara*, which merges in *mahat tattva*, which merges into *prakruti, pradhaana*, and all www.sadagopan.org  [[75]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



the *chetanaas * go and join together, and become united with *Bhagavaan * as *tamah **pare deve ekee bhavati*, which is *tamas shareera*. They go and join with *ekee **bhaava*, as though it is not two, but one. 



By the above two *shlokaas, kaaranatva*, and *samhartrutva * are told. *Yama * is telling his *bhata * about this, the glory of *Bhagavaan*, that He is the one who controls. Those who have taken refuge in Him, don't even go near them. *Yama * is warning him very secretly. While telling this, he is telling the glory of *Bhagavaan*, that He is the Lord of everything. He is the sole creator, and everything merges into Him during *pralaya*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 18: ****Harim amara \(ganaa\) varaachitaanghri padmam pranamati yah paramaarthato hi ****martyah | ****Tam apagata samasta paapa bandham vraja parihrutya yathaa agnimaajyasiktam ****||** *Hari's * Lotus Feet are worshipped by all the excellent gods, that Hari; that human who surrenders unto that *Hari*, with a *paramaarthataa*, thinking that He is the Ultimate Reality, for the Ultimate benefit, that person, gets rid of all the sins immediately; and that person who has surrendered unto the Lord and got rid of all his sins, just leave him and run away from him. He is as pure as fire which is glowing with huge flames, increased by the aahuti, ghee which is poured into the Agni, because of which Agni is glowing with huge flames. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Harim iti | Paramaarthatah nirupaadhikam | Agni drushtaanto bhakta ****samsarginaam api parihaaraarthah | ***Paramaartha * means without any *upaadhis. Bhagavaan * is the *nirupaadhika bandhu, **nirupaadhika pitaa, bhraataa*, everything; understanding this, one who surrenders unto Him. *Aajya * is poured into *Agni*, that also becomes pure, and *Agni * is pure by itself. *Bhagavad bhaktaas * are as pure as *agni*. Those who come in contact are also pure. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 19: ****Iti yamavachanam nishamya paashee yamapurushah tam uvaacha dharmaraajam ****| ****Kathaya mama vibho samasta dhaatuh bhavati hareh khalu yaadrusho asya ****bhaktah || **Having heard and understood all these from *Yama*, the *bhata * with the *paasha * in his hand, asked the *Dharmaraaja Yama *- that *Hari*, who is *dhaataa*, all controller of everyone, tell me how to recognize a devotee of *Hari*. 



For this, *Yama * will start telling all the signs of *Vishnu bhaktaas* or *Vaishnavaas*, in these wonderful *shlokaas*, which tell how to recognize a true devotee of *Vishnu*, a *Vaishnava*. ****www.sadagopan.org  [[76]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 20: ****Na chalati nija varna dharmato yah sama matih aatma suhrut vipaksha pakshe | ****Na harati na cha hanti kinchit ucchaih sthita manasam tam avehi ****vishnubhaktam ||** One who does not move away from his *varna aashrama dharma*, he follows *varna **aashrama dharmaas*, without transgressing even little, as told in the *shaastraas*. He is equally disposed towards himself, his friends and enemies. He does not steal from anyone. He does not hurt anyone. He does not kill any being. Such a person who has a steady mind, and pure mind, 



There are two *paathaantaraas - sthita manasam * and *sita manasam*. * **Na prahrushyati sammane na avamaanena anutapyate | **Gangaa hrudaya akshobhyah* He is not happy when someone honours him, and not get depressed when someone ridicules him. He is steady like a huge pond of *Ganga*. He has a steady mind. 



*Ramayana * has a nice example. When *Vaalmiki * tells *Bharadvaaja*, looking at the *Tamasaa teertha*, where he wants to take bath, that "This water is so pure and clear that it brings me to my mind, about the mind of a devotee of God, which is so pure and clear". This is *sita manasam*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 21: ****Kali kalusha malena yasya na aatmaa vimalamateh malineekrutah tam enam | ****Manasi kruta janaardanam manushyam satatam avehi hareh ateeva bhaktam ||** He tells about the *bhakta * of *Hari*, one whose mind does not become impure or disturbed due to *raaga, dvesha*. He is of a clear pure mind. Such a person, in his mind, *Janaardana * is firmly established, he is always meditating on *Janaardana, **Janaardana * is filling his mind completely. Know that person, that he is utmost devotee of *Hari*, and stay away from him \( *Yama * tells his *bhata*\).   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Kali kalusha iti | Kali kalusham kali kaalushyam raaga dveshaadi, tat eva malam ****|** *Kali kalusha * means *Kali kaalushya*, which is defects which come due to *Kaliyuga, **raaga, dvesha*, etc.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 22: ****Kanakamapi rahasi avekshya buddhyaa trunamiva yah samavaiti vai parasvam | ****Bhavati cha bhagavati ananyachetaah purushavaram tam avehi vishnubhaktam ****||** Know such a person as a devotee of *Vishnu*; even in secrecy, when nobody is there, he sees gold, and knowing that it belongs to someone else, he treats it like grass, he does not even touch it. He is single-mindedly devoted on *Bhagavaan*, that excellent person, know such an excellent person as the devotee of *Vishnu*. www.sadagopan.org  [[77]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



*Yama * explains how one who is following all the *varna aashrama dharmaas*, who treats everyone equally, who is not interested in others properties, money, or even if he sees gold in secrecy, he treats as a blade of grass, and who is always meditating upon *Achyuta, Ananta, Vishnu *- don't even go near such a devotee of Vishnu. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 23: ****Sphatika giri shilaa amalah kva vishnuh manasi nrunaam kva cha matsara aadi ****doshah | ****Na hi tuhina mayookha rashmi punje bhavati hutaashanadeeptijah prataapah || ***Vishnu * is so pure, just like *sphatika giri shilaa*, the rock of a *sphatika * mountain, He is so pure, without any defect. Such a *Vishnu*, if He is firmly established in the minds of humans, how can defects like jealousy and others have a place there? In whose minds, *Vishnu * who is so pure, as the *shilaa * of a *sphatika giri*, like the mountain of *sphatika*, is completely filling the mind, where is the place for any defect at all like *matsara * and others. The moon, the flood of cool moon rays, when that is there, in front of them, the heap of *hutaashana, Agni * which is having huge flames also, does not stand. In the same way, devotees of *Vishnu*, in whose mind, *Vishnu * who is without any defects, and is pure as the mountain of *sphatika*, He is established, there will be no defect at all, like *matsara * and others. When *Vishnu * is there, established in the mind of a person, how can there be any defect at all, like *matsara * and others, because *Vishnu * is as pure as a rock taken from a mountain of crystal; it does not have any defects, and it has all the good qualities. Like this, *Mahaa Vishnu * is *akhila heya pratibhata*, and is *sakala kalyaana **gunaatmaka*. When such a person is there in the mind, firmly established, how can there be a place for any defect at all? It is just like the cool flood of rays of moon, when it is flowing, how can even the heat of a glowing flame affect one? 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Sphatika iti | Sakala dosha pratibhate kalyaana gunaatmake bhagavati manasi ****sthite nrunaam matsara aadi dosho na bhavati iti arthah | Na hi ityaadi | Vasati ****iti sheshah | ***Bhagavaan * who is so pure, means He can dispel defects from distance itself, He rejects all defects from a distance itself, He is an ocean of all auspicious qualities. When that *Bhagavaan * is filling the mind, for such a person, the *matsara * and other *doshaas * can never find a place in their minds. Just as flood of cool rays of the moon, the heat of fire will not stay, just like that, he says. 



Like this, *Yama * further continues to tell the *lakshanaas * of *Vaishnavaas*, who are all the time meditating on *Bhagavaan*, whose mind is filled with *Bhagavaan*. Such a *Bhagavaan * who is *akhila heya pratibhata*, and *sakala kalyaana gunaatmaka*. This is how to recognize *vaishnavaas*. Those who are not the devotees of *Vishnu *- about these, will come next. We are studying *Amsha * 3, Chapter 7, where the *lakshana * of the devotees of *Mahaavishnu*, are explained by *Yama * to his *bhata*, and he cautions www.sadagopan.org  [[78]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





the *bhata * not to go near them because he is not the ruler for them. And *Yama * himself is being ruled over by *Sri Mahaavishnu*, and that he should not go near the *Vishnubhaktaas*. The *Yama bhata * asks him how to recognize a *Vishnu **bhakta. Yama * explains the characteristics of a devotee of *Vishnu*. ** **

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 24: ****Vimala matih amatsarah prashaantah shuchi charito akhila sattva mitra bhootah ****| ****Priya hita vachanah astamaanamayo vasati sadaa hrudi tasya vaasudevah || **One who has all these characteristics, *Vaasudeva * ever lives in such a person. One who has a pure mind, one who does not have jealousy and such defects, one whose mind is always in tranquility and equipoise, one whose conduct is as told in the *shaastraas*, of very pure conduct, one who is equally disposed and very friendly towards all beings, one who always speaks what is good and what is pleasing, one who does not have *aatmaabhimaana * or wrong knowledge - in such a devotees mind, *Vaasudeva * lives all the time. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Vimala matih iti | Yasya hrudi vaasudevah sah nirasta nikhila doshah kalyaana ****guna yuktah cha bhavati iti arthah | Maanah garvah, maayaa shaathyam |** In whose mind *Vaasudeva * is established, he will have all auspicious qualities in him, he will be an abode to all auspicious qualities, and will also be without any defect, he will also become just like *Vaasudeva. Maana * is explained as arrogance. *Maayaa * is being deceitful or fraudulent. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 25: ****Vasati hrudi sanaatane cha tasmin bhavati pumaan jagato asya soumya roopah | ****Kshiti rasam ati ramyam aatmanah antah kathayati chaarutayaa eva saalapotah ****||** In such a person’s mind, when the *Puraana Purusha, Nitya Purusha, Paramaatman, **Vaasudeva*, lives. Such a person will be very pleasingly disposed, to look itself, he will be very pleasing to the whole world. The tender sprout of the mango tree which is just coming, so pleasant and beautiful it is; it conveys the beautiful pure essence of the earth which is contained inside it; this is displayed by the pleasant look of the tender sprout of the *sala * tree. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Bhagavat dhyaana paro bhaktah chaakshushena soumyatvaadi gunena jnyaatum ****shakya iti aaha vasati iti | Soumya roopah \* Stabdho asi uta tam aadesham ****apraakshyah, \* Brahmavida iva soumya te mukham bhaati \* ityaadivat | Baala ****saala taruh aatmanah chaarutayaa eva kshiteh antastham atiramyam rasam ****saaram soochayati | **A devotee who is all the time meditating on *Bhagavaan*, even to look itself, he will be most pleasing. One can know by looking at him, because he will be so pleasant to look at. When *Shvetaketu * completes his studies and comes to his father, *Uddhaalaka*, he looks full with knowledge, *paripoorna iva drushyate *- "You look as though you have studied all the things", he is able to make out by looking at him itself, and asks him a question. Another statement from the *Upakosala **Vidyaa*, where *Upakosala * has been taught by *Agni*, the initial parts of the *tattva **jnyaana*, in the absence of his *aachaarya, Satyakaama Jaabaala * who would have www.sadagopan.org  [[79]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





gone for *teertha yaatraa*; when he comes back afterwards, looking at *Upakosala*, he says - "Your face is glowing as though you are knowledgeable about *Brahman*, like a *Brahmavit*. Who taught you?". This reflects the knowledge which is inside, *Bhagavaan * who is inside, in the mind of a person, is reflected outside in the external appearance of the person itself. The young tender sprout of *Saala * plant, is most beautiful, pleasant; with its look itself, it indicates the beautiful essence in the earth. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 26: ****Yama niyama vidhoota kalmashaanaam anudinam achyuta sakta maanasaanaam ****| ****Apagata mada maana matsaraanaam vraja bhata dooratarena maanavaanaam || ***Yama * tells his *bhata *- Those yogis who have got rid of all the defects of the mind, by practice of *Ashtaanga Yoga - Yama, Niyama, Aasana*, etc., and are of pure mind, and are meditating on *Bhagavaan * all the time, with utmost devotion and love; and because of that only, they have no arrogance or wrong notion, no *abhimaana*, no *matsara*, no *dosha*, with all the *doshaas * destroyed - from a distance itself, you will be able to recognize them. Don't even go near them. From a distance itself, go away from them. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 27: ****Hrudi yadi bhagavaan anaadiraaste harih asi shankha gadaadharo avyayaatmaa ****| ****Tadagham aghavighaata kartrubhinnam bhavati katham sati cha andhakaaram ****arke ||** That *Bhagavaan * who is without a beginning, that *anaadi Bhagavaan*, if He is present in the mind of a person; if a person is always meditating on *Bhagavaan*, with utmost love, *Hari*. That *Bhagavaan * is none other than *Hari*, wearing all His divine weapons, the sword, the *Shankha*, the *Gada*, and He is the *Avikaari*, unchanging *Paramaatman*. If there is any sin in such a person's mind, that will be cut off; a person who cuts off all the sins. *Agha vighaata **kartaa * is *Bhagvaan * only. *Bhagavaan * is One who destroys all the sins. When such a Person is there, all the sins are destroyed. When the Sun is there, how can there be darkness. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Hrudi iti | Tat agham dhyaatuh paapam agha vighaata kartaa bhagavataa ****bhinnam videernam bhavati | Arke satyapi katham andhakaaram | **The sins of a person who is meditating upon *Vishnu*, gets destroyed completely by *Hari*, who is of the nature of destroying all the sins. When Sun is there, how can there be darkness. Now, *Yama * tells the signs of those who are not devotees of *Bhagavaan*. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 28: ****Harati paradhanam nihanti jantoon vadati tathaa anruta nishthuraani yah cha | ****Ashubha janita durmadasya pumsah kalusha mateh hrudi tasya na asti anantah ****|| **He steals others money, he kills or injures other beings, he tells all harsh words, and all untruth. Because of the bad deeds that he has done, and the sins that he www.sadagopan.org  [[80]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





commits, the evil deeds that he keeps doing, he develops a kind of arrogance. He has all the wrong knowledge in his mind, and his mind is full of defects. *Ananta * cannot be present in such a persons mind. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Parahimsaadinaa doshena abhaktasya hrudi bhagavat asannidhih jnyaatum ****shakya iti aaha harati ityaadi chaturbhih | Harati iti | Nishthuraani purushaani ****|** In four *shlokaas, Yama * says that the *bhata * can also know who are the people in whose mind *Bhagavaan * is not there, who are not devotees of *Vishnu*, can know this also. They do *para himsaa * and other *doshaas*. It can be known that *Bhagavaan * is not present in such a persons mind. They utter harsh words. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 29: ****Na sahati parasampadam vinindaam kalusha matih kurute sataam asaadhuh | ****Na yajati na dadaati yah cha santam manasi na tasya janaardano adhamasya ||** He does not tolerate others prosperity. He is an evil minded person. He abuses all the *saadhu purushaas*. He insults or cheats noble persons. He does not perform *yajnya yaagaas*. He does not donate, does not do *daana*. He does not worship *Bhagavaan Vishnu*, through *yajnya yaagaas*, and other *karma anushthaana*; he does not donate to *Vishnu bhaktaas*. In such a lowly person, *Janaardana * cannot be present in his mind. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Na iti | Na yajati santam - vishnum na archayati, na dadaati tat bhaktaaya |** **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 30: ****Parama suhrudi baandhave kalatre suta tanayaa pitru maatru bhrutya varge | ****Shathamatih upayaati yo artha trushnaam tam adhamacheshtam avehi na asya ****bhaktam || **In his dear friend, in his relatives, towards his wife, son, daughter, father, mother and all his servants -this wicked person or fraudulent person approaches all of them with a mind to make money, or with a desire to cheat them. Such a person who has evil deeds, you can very clearly know that he is not a *bhakta*, and go and catch him there. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Parama iti | Avehi na asya bhaktam iti bhakta padena nai sambandhah | ****Abhaktam avehi iti arthah | **For one who is not a devotee of *Bhagavaan*, go and catch him. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 31: ****Ashubha matih asat pravrutti saktah satatam anaarya kusheela sangamattah | ****Anudina kruta paapa bandhayuktah purusha pashuh na hi vaasudevabhaktah || **In these four *shlokaas, Yama * is explaining the characteristics of those who are not devotees of *Vishnu*. He is of impure mind. He is always attached to doing wrong deeds. All the time, he is inauspicious, and of bad conduct. He is attached to all the sensual pleasures. Because of this, he has some kind of arrogance. He is *aviveki*, cannot distinguish good from the bad, *dharma * from *adharma*. Everyday he is involved in doing bad deeds only. He is accumulating things all the time. He is www.sadagopan.org  [[81]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





getting bound by this. He is like an animal in the form of a human being. He is lowly person, cannot be a devotee of *Vishnu * at all. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Ashubhamatih iti | Anaaryam amangalam, kusheelam duhsheelam, sango ****vishayasangah, taih matah purusha pashuh avivekee | Anaarya kulsheela ****sangamatta iti paathah | **Next, *Yama * is coming back to *bhaktaas*. Some more characteristics of devotees of *Vishnu * are going to be told again. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 32: ****Sakalam idam aham cha vaasudevah parama pumaan parameshavarah sa ekah | ****Iti matih achalaa bhavati anante hrudayagate vraja taan vihaaya dooraat ||** All these are *Vaasudeva * only, the entire things are *Vaasudeva * only, I am also *Vaasudeva * only; everything is *Vaasudevaatmaka*, having *Vaasudeva * as its Inner Self. He is *antaryaami * present in everything. He is One, He is *Parama Purusha*. He is *Parameshvara*. When *Ananta * is firmly established in the mind, this kind of an understanding becomes unshaken in one persons mind. When one meditates on *Ananta*, and establishes Him firmly in the mind, for such a person, there is a clear understanding that everything is *Bhagavadaatamaka*, and he sees *Bhagavaan * everywhere. Don't even go near such a person, just run away from a distance itself. From a distance itself, you can recognize them. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Bhaktasya lakshanaantaram aaha sakalam iti |** **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 33: ****Kamalanayana vaasudeva vishno dharanihara achyuta shankha chakra paane | ****Bhava sharanam iteerayanti ye vai tyaja bhata dooratarena taan apaapaan || **Those who always keep pronouncing that *Bhagavaan*, who has Lotus Eyes, who is *Vaasudeva, Vishnu, Dharanidhara*, One who is holding the divine *Shankha * and *Chakra*, "You are the refuge for me, please become my refuge, I am surrendering unto You", one who says like this, just run away from such a person. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Kamala nayana iti | Eerayanti iti vachanaat artha jnyaanam antarena api naama ****ucchaarana maatram eva paapa haram iti soochitam | Eeranam shravanaadeh ****api upalakshanam |** Even if one does not understand the meanings of the words *Kamalanayana, **Vaasudeva, Vishnu, Dharanidhara, Achyuta, Shankha Chakra Paane*, but simply keeps telling that, and says "You are the Ultimate Refuge for me, I seek refuge in Your Lotus Feet". One who says this, without even knowing the meanings of all these words, just run away from such a person. They are without any sins, they are very pure devotees of *Vishnu*. By mere pronouncing of the names of *Bhagavaan*, all the sins get destroyed. Pronouncing is also *upalakshana * to *shravana*, it also indicates *shravana*. This is why from the very beginning, *Yama * is clearly telling the *bhata * in a low, hushed voice, in his ears, that nobody else should listen to that. Because even if www.sadagopan.org  [[82]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





one listens to these things, sins will get destroyed, and there will be nobody in *naraka * for him to rule over. Even listening to *Bhagavaan's * name is due to great *punya*, and *shravana * itself is *alabhya*. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 34: ****Vasati manasi yasya sah avyayaatmaa purushavarasya na tasya drushti paate | ****Tava gatih atha vaa mamaasti chakra pratihata veerya balasya sah anyalokyah ****||** That *Parama Purusha * who is *Mahaa Vishnu*, who is established firmly in one's mind, such an excellent person, a *purusha vara *- you cannot go near his sight also, or even I cannot go \(says *Yama*\). **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Vasati iti | Yasya manasi harih vasati tasya yaavat drushtipaatam chakram ****paribhramati, atah tat drushtipaate tat pratihata veerya balasya tava mama vaa ****gatih naasti | Sa tu anya lokyah - anya lokaarhah, na tu asmat lokaarhah, \* Na ****khalu bhagavataa yamavishayam gacchanti iti vachanaat | **As long as he can see, as long as his sight reaches, for the entire distance, there is a *chakra * which is guarding him. *Bhagavaan's Sudarshana Chakra * is protecting them, as long as they can see. Till that distance, the *Chakra * is guarding them. Nobody can go near that because that will dispel all others, and will destroy anyone who goes near with a wrong intention. It will destroy all our valour, and we cannot even go near that area. You cannot also not enter, I cannot also not enter there. Such a person deserves some other place, not where our ruling is there. He will go to *Paramapada, Vishnu's Saamraajya*. He will not come here. *Bhaagavataas * will never go under the sway of *Yama*. *Kaalinga* concludes this. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 35: ****Kaalingah - ****Iti nija bhata shaasanaaya devo ravi tanayah sah kila aaha dharmaraajah | ****Mama kathitam idam cha tena tubhyam kuruvara samyak idam mayaa api cha ****uktam || ***Kaalinga *- In order to tell his assistant, what all he has to follow, and what are his instructions, *Vivasvaan's * son, *Vaivasvata*, who is *Yama*, whatever *Dharmaraaja * says, whatever was told to me by the *Yama bhata*, I have told you, I am telling you. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Iti iti | Tena yamabhatena |** *Bheeshmar * is concluding this. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 36: ****Bheeshmah - ****Nakulaih tat mama aakhyaatam poorvam tena dvi janmanaa | ****Kalingadeshaat abhyetya preetena sumahaatmanaa || ***Bheeshma *- This was told to me by that *Brahmin * long back. That *Brahmin * who came from *Kalinga desha*, he told me with great love, and I am telling you this. www.sadagopan.org  [[83]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 37: ****Mayaa api etat yathaa anyaayam samyak vatsa tavoditam | ****Yathaa vishnumrute naanyat traanam samsaara saagare ||** As I heard, and as it is, I have also told you. This is the ultimate message that is given. There is nobody who can save us from this ocean of *samsaara*, other than *Vishnu*. In every *adhyaaya * of *Vishnu Puraana*, we see that *Vishnu * is *antaryaami * to everyone, is present everywhere. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 38: ****Kimkaraah paasha dandaah cha na yamo na cha yaatanaah | ****Samarthaah tasya yasya aatmaa keshavaalambanah tadaa ||** All *Yama kinkaraas * who are holding the *Yama paasha, danda*, or even *Yama * or all those sufferings or *narakaas *- all of these cannot touch a person whose mind is always meditating upon *Keshava*, **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Kimkaraa iti | Yasya aatmaa keshava aalambanam iti aatma nivedanoktih | **This is *aatma nivedana * itself, surrendering oneself to *Bhagavaan * is known as *Keshavaalamabana*. **\* Shravanam keertanam vishnoh smaranam paadasevanam | Archanam ****vandanam daasyam sakhyam aatma nivedanam || iti bhakteh nava vidha ukteh ****|** As told in the *Nava vidha bhakti - Shravana, Keertana, Smarana, Paadasevana, **Archana, Vandana, Daasya, Sakhya, Aatmanivedana*. Everything culminates in *aatma nivedana*. **Evam ukta shravanaadi nava vidha antarangaam vakshyamaana sadaachaara ****upalakshanaa bhagavat eka chittataa svaroopalakshanaa bhagavati nirupaadhika ****preetiroopaa bhaktih eva yama vashyatva nivaarikaa iti adhyaayaarthah |** This is the gist of this *adhyaaya*, telling the *samvaada * of *Yama * and his *kinkara*, telling all the *lakshanaas * of *Vishnu Bhaktaas*, and also of those who are not *Vishnu **Bhaktaas *- the gist of this is given by *Sri Engal Aalwaan * here. Whatever is told here - *Shravana, Keertana, Smarana, Paadasevana*, etc. the *Nava vidha bhaktis*, having all of them and also including all the *sadaachaara lakshana * which is going to be told in further chapters, single-mindedly meditating upon *Bhagavaan*, fixing the mind on *Bhagavaan*, it should be of utmost loving devotion, that kind of devotion, can help one person getting rid of going under the sway of *Yama*. This is the gist of the *adhyaaya*. *Nirupaadhika preetiroopaa * is the most important thing, which *Bhaashyakaarar * tells so many times. **Athavaa asmin adhyaaye jaatismaro naama kaschit munih, tat ukti moolaa ****kaalinga uktih bheeshmena nakulaaya uchyate |** In the beginning, one more meaning was told - a *muni* named *Jaatismara*, in *Shloka * 9 of this Chapter. There is a *muni * by name *Jaatismara*, www.sadagopan.org  [[84]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





this *Jaatismara * told *Kaalinga*, and this is told by *Kaalinga * to *Bheeshma*, and this is told by *Bheeshma * to *Nakula*. **Tatra iyam yojanaa puraa mama ityaadi maam uvaacha iti antam bheeshma ****vachanam |** Up to " *Maam uvaacha*" is what *Bheeshma * is telling. **Prushto vai mayaa iti aarabhya anyathaa hi mayaa kvachit iti antam kaalinga ****vaakya, tatra vatsa iti bheeshmasya sambodhanam |** " *Prushto vai mayaa*" is *Kaalinga vachana*. Up to " *Anyathaa hi mayaa kvachit". **Kaalingaka * is telling *Jaatismara * whatever is told - it happened exactly like that, and that he has never seen anything happening in any other way. He is telling the truth. This is the other *anvaya * which is explained here. **Dvijo jaatismarah | Ekadaa tu iti shloko bheeshma vaakyam |** After this, " *Ekadaa tu mayaa*" is told by *Bheeshma*. **Jaatismarena kathita ityaadi mayaa api cha uktam iti antam kaalinga vaakyam |** The next *shloka - "Jaatismarena kathito" * up to " *mayaa api cha uktam*" is told by *Kaalinga*. **Mama kathitam idam cha tena iti atra tat shabdena jaatismarasya paraamarshah ****|** This is another *anvaya * told by *Kaalinga*. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 7, Shloka 39: ****Sri Paraasharah - ****Etat mune samaakhyaatam geetam vaivasvatena yat | ****Tvat prashna anugatam samyak kim anyat shrotum icchasi ||** *Sri Paraasharar *- O *Maitreyar*, as asked by you, I have told you nicely about what *Yama * said. What else would you need to hear? This concludes Chapter 7. **|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Truteeye Amshe Saptamo Adhyaayah || ****|| Iti Sri Vishnu Chitteeye Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Truteeye Amshe ****Saptamo Adhyaayah ||   
www.sadagopan.org  [[85]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



  
|| Atha Ashtamo Adhyaayah || ****Worship of Vishnu, Varna Dharmaas   
Now, Chapter 8. ** **
