+++
title = "16"

+++


**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 1: ****Ourvah - ****Havishya matsya maamsaih tu shashasya nakulasya cha | ****Soukara cchaagala aineya rouravaih gavayena cha ||** *Havishya * is the grains used by the sages in the forest, milk, *soma rasa, shuddha **maamsa, saindhava lavana *- these are *havishya*. Fish, deer, rabbit, hog, goat, antelope, some kind of deer, some kind of cow, ... Here, it is told that offering *maamsa * in *shraaddha * is supposed to be very good. This is also told in *Manu Smruti*. There is a *Gita * Press commentary, the *Hindi * version, that *maamsa * is not allowed in the *shraaddha*. Quoting from *Manu Smruti * itself, where generally, it is said that " *Na himsyaat sarva bhootaani*", that one should not do *himsaa * to any being. But, in *yajnya * and *shraaddha*, this is exempted. Nowadays, the grains we use are equivalent for these things. Nowadays, the practice of offering *maamsa * is not there. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Havishya iti | Havishyena ekam maasam truptih, matsyena dvou, maamsena ****treen maasaan | Atra maamso haarinaadi \* Treen maasaan harinena truptih iti ****manu ukteh | Chaagalah - ajah, ruruh mahaan krushnasaarah | ***Havishya * is one month. *Matsya*, if offered, it is two months, they get pleased. Deer, it is for three months. *Manu smruti * is also quoted here. *Chagala * is goat. *Ruru * is another kind of deer. Each one of them, if offered, *pitrus * will get *trupti * for one more month each. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 2: ****Ourabhragavyaih cha tathaa maasa vruddhyaa pitaamahaah | ****Prayaanti truptim maamsaih tu nityam vaardhreena saamishaih ||** ... sheep, by-products of cow \(ghee, milk\). There is a bird called *Vaardhreena*, and if that *maamsa * is given, the *pitrus * will be always satisfied. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Ourabhra iti | Urabhrah oornaayuh | Gavyam payah, paayasam vaa \* ****Samvatsaram tu gavyena payasaa paayasena vaa \* iti smruteh | Gavyam **www.sadagopan.org  [[181]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





**maamsam iti anye | Samvatsaram gavyena preetih bhooyaat | Atah maahishena ****etena \* Graamya aranyaanaam pashoonaam maamsam medhyam punyam ****punyatamam \* iti aapastamba uktih | Maasa vruddhtyaa ekaadyekottaram ****dvaadasha maasaantam maasa vruddhyaa truptih | \* Krushnagreevo ****raktashiraah shvetapaksho vihangamah | Sa vai vaardhreenasah prokta iti eshaa ****naigamee uktih | iti, trih pibantam payah ksheebam vruddam shvetam ****ajaapatim | Vaardhreenasam tu tam praahuh yaajnikaah shraadhakarmane | iti ****cha | **Milk or products of milk. They will be pleased for one year if milk or *paayasa * is offered. Some people say that *gavya * is also *maamsa*. In *Aapastamba sookti * also, it is told like this. *Vaardhreena * is a bird which has got white feathers, and read head, and black neck. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 3: ****Khangamaamsam ateeva atra kaalashaakam tathaa madhu | ****Shastaani karmani atyanta truptidaani nareshvara ||** *Khadga mruga *\(rhino\), some kind of basil, honey, *shasta * are supposed to be very good for using in *shraaddha*. They please the *pitrus * a lot. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Khadga maamsam iti | Kaalashaakah kaitharyah | **These are some of the things good for use in *shraaddha*. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 4: ****Gayaam upetya yah shraaddham karoti pruthiveepate | ****Saphalam tasya tat janma jaayate pitru tushtidam ||** **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 5: ****Prashaantikaah saneevaaraah shyaamakaah dvividhaah tathaa | ****Vanyoushadhee pradhaanaah tu shraaddhaarhaah purusharshabha ||** The kinds of grains used in *shraaddha*, are told, wild rice, two kinds of millet, medicinal herbs, are all good for usage in *shraaddha*. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Prashaantikaah iti | Prashaantikaah kaalayavaakhya dhaanya visheshaah | **

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 6: ****Yavaah priyangavaah mudgaa godhoomaa vreehayah tilaah | ****Nishpaavaah kovidaaraah cha sarpapaashchaah atra shobhanaah || **Millet, gram, wheat, rice, sesame, pulse, mustard, are all allowed. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Yavaah iti | Kovidaaraah kodravah, yugapatraakhya vruksho vaa | **



What is to be given up will be told next. We are studying *Amsha * 3, Chapter 16, where *Ourva Rishi * is telling King *Sagara * about what are all the things allowed for offering to *Braahmanaas * as www.sadagopan.org  [[182]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



food items, for *Braahmana bhojana*. Next, he is going to tell about what are not allowed, and also water, milk, etc. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 7: ****Akrutaagrayanam yat cha dhaanyajaatam nareshvara | ****Raajamaashaan anoom cha eva masooraan cha vivarjayet || **These are what are not allowed. The grains which are brought are to be initially used in *yajnya*, and then only it is good for other purposes. That which is not used at all for *yajnya*, is not to be used for *Braahmana bhojana. Raajamaasha*, a special kind of pulse is not to be used. *Anu * is a kind of millet. Lentils - these are not to be used.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Akruta iti | Raajamaashah anuh kshudra dhaanya visheshah |** 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 8: ****Alaabum grunjanam cha eva pallaandum pindamoolakam | ****Gaandhaarakakarambhaani lavanaannyouparaani cha || **Onion and garlic are not to be used. Roots should not be used. *Pindamoolaka * is a kind of root. Rice with fragrance is not to be used. Fossil salt is not to be used.   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Alaambviti | Masooram grunjanam pallandum cha lashuna jaati visheshaah | ****Pindamoolakam kandavisheshah | Gaandhaarakah sugandha shaali visheshah | ****Aaranaalakam iti anye | Karambah - bhrashtanistushadhaanya choornam | ****Lavanam lavana utkatam |** Fermented boiled rice is not allowed. After removing the chaff, small pieces of grains which are left over, at the bottom, are not to be used. Too much salt is not to be used. 





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 9: ****Aaraktaah cha eva niryaasaah pratyaksha lavanaani cha | ****Varjaani etaani vai shraaddhe yat cha vaachaa na shasyate || **Red asafoetida, red kind of juice taken from the bark of a tree, is not allowed. Those which look like salt, but not salt, are not to be used. Similar things, not specifically told here, are also not allowed. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Aaraktaa iti | Niryaasah hingvaadi | **





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 10: ****Naktaahrutam anucchishtam trupyate na cha yatra gouh | ****Durgandhi phenilam cha ambu shraaddha yogyam na paarthiva || **What is the kind of water not to be used, is told now. Water that is brought in the night and stored, is not to be used. In a well, there has to be water already there; if the well is dry, and the first water collected there is not supposed to be good. www.sadagopan.org  [[183]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



Water that is not drunk by cow is not to be used. Milk of a cow which does not have a calf is not to be used. Water having bad smell or frost is not to be used. These are all not fit to be used in a *shraaddha*. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Naktaahrutam iti | Anucchishtam abhinava udakam | Yadvaa avastaayaah ****payah | **





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 11: ****Ksheeram eka shaphaanaam yat oushtram aavikameva cha | ****Maargam cha maahisham cha eva varjayet shaastra karmani || **This is about kind of milk which is not to be used. A single horned animal - its milk is not to be used. Camel milk, or milk of an ewe are not to be used. Deer, buffalo - these milk are not to be used. 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Kshaaram iti | Shaphah - khurah | **





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 12: ****Shanda apavidva chandaala paapi paashanda rogibhih | ****Krukavaaku shavaana nagna vaanara graamasookaraih || **When the *Brahmins * who are representing the *devaas * and *pitrus*, when they are eating, they should not come in sight of all these - an eunuch, one who is not accepted by *Guru * and *Brahmins*, *Chandaala*, sinner, those having diseases, calf, dog, one who has given up the *Veda dharmaas*, monkeys, wild pig, village pig, ... 



**Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Shanda iti | Apaviddhih guru dvija aadi bahishkrutah | Nagnah veda dharma ****tyaagee | **





**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 13: ****Udakyaasootikaashoucha mruta haaraih cha veekshate | ****Shraaddhe suraa na pitaro bhunjate purusharshabha || **... a *rajasvala stree*, if one is observing a period of impurity due to some close relative's death, those who carry dead bodies, these are the people who should not be seen by the Brahmins while having food. If *Brahmins * come in front of these, that food is not accepted by *devaas * and *pitrus*.   


Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Udakya iti | Ashouchah shoucha heenah | Mrutahaarah shavoddhaara vruttih | **It can also be *ashoucha*, one who lacks *shaastra shuddhi*. ** ** **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 14: ****Tasmaat parishrite kuryaat shraaddham shraddhaasamanvitah | ****Urvyaam cha tilavikshepaat yaatudhaanaan nivaarayet || **Therefore, a well enclosed place, where passers by are not coming inside, with www.sadagopan.org  [[184]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





great devotion, one has to do the *shraaddha*. The *raakshasaas * and others should be expelled from the place by spraying *tilaa*, sesame seeds on the ground, before they have their food. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Tasmaat iti | Parishrite - samvrute | **

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 15: ****Nakhaadinaa cha upapannam kesha keetaadibhih nrupa | ****Na cha eva abhishavaih mishram annam pariyushitam tathaa || **The kind of anna which is not to be used is - that which has particles of nails, hair, insects; the rice should not have too much of water, or should not also be completely drained of water. That which is mixed like this, the gods and *pitrus * do not accept such a food. Also stale food. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Nakha dina iti | Abhishavaih - nishpeedita rasaih tandula jalaih vaa, mishram na ****bhunjata iti anushangah | **

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 16: ****Shraddhaasamanvitaih dattam pitrubhyo naamagotratah | ****Yadaahaaraah tu te jaataah tat aahaarastvameti tat || **Clearly specifying *naama, gotra*, and offered with great devotion. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Shraaddha iti | Yat annam yat naama gotraan pitruun uddishya dattam tat ****lokaantara sthaanam api tat tat loka tat tat jaati uchita aaharatvena parinatam ****sat bhogaaya syaat | Tat yathaa - te pitarah svargino jaataah chet tatra ****amrutam syaat, manushyaah chet annam, tiryak cha chet trunaadi | **Whoever is the *pitru*, whose name and *gotra * we tell and offer the food, whatever food is offered like this, even if they are in some other world, whatever food is proper in that world - whatever food is offered by us here will get converted into that food, which is fit to be used in the world they are actually there. This is how it will become enjoyable to them. If they are in *svarga*, the food offered here will become *amruta*; if they are in this world itself, then it will become anna; if they have taken the birth of animals, it will become grass, etc. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 17: ****Shrooyate cha api pitrubhih geetaa gaathaa maheepate | ****Ikshvaakoh manuputrasya kalaapa upavane puraa || **There is a *gaatha * which is told - *pitrus * sing this song. *Manu's * son, *Ikshvaaku*, long back, has told that, in *Kalaapa upavana*, near *Himaalayaas*, a specific village; it is heard that *pitrus * are singing this. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Shrooyate iti | Kalaapah himavat paarshve kashchit graama visheshah |** **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 18: ****Api naste bhavishyanti kule sanmaarga sheelinah | **www.sadagopan.org  [[185]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 





**Gayaam upetya ye pindaan daasyanti asmaakam aadaraat || **Will there be anyone born in our *kula * who are in the right path, following the path of *dharma*, as told in the *shaastraas*, who go to Gaya, and offer us *pindaas * there, with great respect. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 19: ****Api nassa kule jaato yo no dadyaat trayodasheem | ****Paayasam madhusarpirbhyaam varshaasu cha maghaasu cha ||** They also say - in our *kula*, will there be anyone who is born, who, on a *trayodashi*, will offer *paayasa * with honey and ghee, every year, during *Bhaadrapada maasa, **Maghaa nakshatra*. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Api na iti | Trayodasheem trayodashyaam | Varshaasu bhaadrapade | ****Maaghaasu maaghanakshatre | Maagha nakshatra yukta bhaadrapada krushna ****trayodashyaam iti arthah | **Having *Maghaa nakshatra, Bhaadrapada maasa, Krishna paksha, trayodashi*. On that day, will they offer to us *paayasa * mixed with honey and ghee. Will such a person be born in our *kula*, they are always expecting. **Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3, Chapter 16, Shloka 20: ****Goureem vaa api udvahet kanyaam neelam vaa vrusham utsrujet | ****Yajate vaa ashvamedhena vidhivat dakshinaavataa ||** *Gouree * is a daughter who is ten year old. Will they get their ten year old daughter married? Will they give her in marriage? One which is red in colour, and face and tail are very white, and its nails and horn are normal white, such a bull is said to be a *neela vrusha*, will someone leave such a bull? Or, will he perform *Ashvamedha **yaaga*, as told in the *shaastraas*, offering all the *dakshinaa * to the *ritwiks*, and others, as told in the *shaastraas*. The *pitrus * are expecting this. These are all good to do. **Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: ****Goureem iti | Udvahet dadyaat | \* Lohite yah tu varnena mukhe pucche cha ****paandurah | Shvetah khura vishaanaabhyaam sa neelo vrusha uchyate || **This completes Chapter 16. * || Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Truteeye Amshe Shodasho Adhyaayah || ** || Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Truteeye Amshe Shodasho **Adhyaayah || ** *** **www.sadagopan.org  [[186]] of 219 



Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 3 



  
|| Atha Saptadasho Adhyaayah || ****Vishnu Stuti, Vishnu creates Maayaamoha** Now Chapter 17. 
