+++
title = "०७"
+++
CHAPTER SEVEN

As related in this chapter, Indra, the King of heaven, committed an offense at the feet of his spiritual master, Bṛhaspati. Bṛhaspati therefore left the demigods, who then had no priest. However, at the request of the demigods, Viśvarūpa, the son of the *brāhmaṇa* Tvaṣṭā, became their priest.

Once upon a time, Indra, the King of the demigods, was sitting with his wife Śacīdevī and being praised by various demigods like the Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Gandharvas when Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, entered the assembly. Indra, being too absorbed in material opulence, forgot himself and did not respect Bṛhaspati, who thus became aware of Indra’s pride in his material opulence and immediately disappeared from the assembly to teach him a lesson. Indra became most repentant, understanding that because of his opulence he had forgotten to respect his spiritual master. He left the palace to beg pardon from his spiritual master, but could not find Bṛhaspati anywhere.

Because of his disrespectful behavior toward his spiritual master. Indra lost all his opulence and was conquered by the demons, who defeated the demigods in a great fight and occupied Indra’s throne. King Indra, along with the other demigods, later took shelter of Lord Brahmā. Understanding the situation, Lord Brahmā chastised the demigods for their offense to their spiritual master. Following Lord Brahmā’s orders, the demigods accepted Viśvarūpa, who was a *brāhmaṇa* and the son of Tvaṣṭā, as their priest. Then they performed *yajñas* under the priesthood of Viśvarūpa and were able to conquer the demons.

## Text 1

### Devanagari

श्रीराजोवाच  
कस्य हेतो- परित्यक्ता आचार्येणात्मन- सुरा- ।  
एतदाचक्ष्व भगवञ्छिष्याणामक्रमं गुरौ ॥ १ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-rājovāca  
*kasya hetoḥ parityaktā  
ācāryeṇātmanaḥ surāḥ  
etad ācakṣva bhagavañ  
chiṣyāṇām akramaṁ gurau*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*rājā* *uvāca* — the King inquired; *kasya* *hetoḥ* — for what reason; *parityaktāḥ* — rejected; *ācāryeṇa* — by the spiritual master, Bṛhaspati; *ātmanaḥ* — of himself; *surāḥ* — all the demigods; *etat* — this; *ācakṣva* — kindly describe; *bhagavan* — O great sage (Śukadeva Gosvāmī); *śiṣyāṇām* — of the disciples; *akramam* — the offense; *gurau* — unto the spiritual master.

### Translation

**Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: O great sage, why did the spiritual master of the demigods, Bṛhaspati, reject the demigods, who were his own disciples? What offense did the demigods commit against their spiritual master? Please describe to me this incident.**

### Purport

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments:

*saptame guruṇā tyaktair  
devair daitya-parājitaiḥ  
viśvarūpo gurutvena  
vṛto brahmopadeśataḥ*

“This Seventh Chapter describes how Bṛhaspati was offended by the demigods, how he left them and the demigods were defeated, and how the demigods, following the instructions of Lord Brahmā, accepted Viśvarūpa as the priest to perform their sacrifice.”

## Texts 2-8

### Devanagari

श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच  
इन्द्रस्त्रिभुवनैश्वर्यमदोल्लङ्घितसत्पथ- ।  
मरुद्भ‍िर्वसुभी रुद्रैरादित्यैर्ऋभुभिर्नृप ॥ २ ॥  
विश्वेदेवैश्च साध्यैश्च नासत्याभ्यां परिश्रित- ।  
सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वैर्मुनिभिर्ब्रह्मवादिभि- ॥ ३ ॥  
विद्याधराप्सरोभिश्च किन्नरै- पतगोरगै- ।  
निषेव्यमाणो मघवान्स्तूयमानश्च भारत ॥ ४ ॥  
उपगीयमानो ललितमास्थानाध्यासनाश्रित- ।  
पाण्डुरेणातपत्रेण चन्द्रमण्डलचारुणा ॥ ५ ॥  
युक्तश्चान्यै- पारमेष्ठ्यैश्चामरव्यजनादिभि- ।  
विराजमान- पौलम्या सहार्धासनया भृशम् ॥ ६ ॥  
स यदा परमाचार्यं देवानामात्मनश्च ह ।  
नाभ्यनन्दत सम्प्राप्तं प्रत्युत्थानासनादिभि- ॥ ७ ॥  
वाचस्पतिं मुनिवरं सुरासुरनमस्कृतम् ।  
नोच्चचालासनादिन्द्र- पश्यन्नपि सभागतम् ॥ ८ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca  
*indras tribhuvanaiśvarya-  
madollaṅghita-satpathaḥ  
marudbhir vasubhī rudrair  
ādityair ṛbhubhir nṛpa*

*viśvedevaiś ca sādhyaiś ca  
nāsatyābhyāṁ pariśritaḥ  
siddha-cāraṇa-gandharvair  
munibhir brahmavādibhiḥ*

*vidyādharāpsarobhiś ca  
kinnaraiḥ patagoragaiḥ  
niṣevyamāṇo maghavān  
stūyamānaś ca bhārata*

*upagīyamāno lalitam  
āsthānādhyāsanāśritaḥ  
pāṇḍureṇātapatreṇa  
candra-maṇḍala-cāruṇā*

*yuktaś cānyaiḥ pārameṣṭhyaiś  
cāmara-vyajanādibhiḥ  
virājamānaḥ paulamyā  
sahārdhāsanayā bhṛśam*

*sa yadā paramācāryaṁ  
devānām ātmanaś ca ha  
nābhyanandata samprāptaṁ  
pratyutthānāsanādibhiḥ*

*vācaspatiṁ muni-varaṁ  
surāsura-namaskṛtam  
noccacālāsanād indraḥ  
paśyann api sabhāgatam*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*bādarāyaṇiḥ* *uvāca* — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied; *indraḥ* — King Indra; *tri*-*bhuvana*-*aiśvarya* — because of possessing all the material opulences of the three worlds; *mada* — due to pride; *ullaṅghita* — who has transgressed; *sat*-*pathaḥ* — the path of Vedic civilization; *marudbhiḥ* — by the wind demigods, known as the Maruts; *vasubhiḥ* — by the eight Vasus; *rudraiḥ* — by the eleven Rudras; *ādityaiḥ* — by the Ādityas; *ṛbhubhiḥ* — by the Ṛbhus; *nṛpa* — O King; *viśvedevaiḥ* *ca* — and by the Viśvadevas; *sādhyaiḥ* — by the Sādhyas; *ca* — also; *nāsatyābhyām* — by the two Aśvinī-kumāras; *pariśritaḥ* — surrounded; *siddha* — by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; *cāraṇa* — the Cāraṇas; *gandharvaiḥ* — and the Gandharvas; *munibhiḥ* — by the great sages; *brahmavādibhiḥ* — by greatly learned impersonalist scholars; *vidyādhara*-*apsarobhiḥ* *ca* — and by the Vidyādharas and Apsarās; *kinnaraiḥ* — by the Kinnaras; *pataga*-*uragaiḥ* — by the Patagas (birds) and Uragas (snakes); *niṣevyamāṇaḥ* — being served; *maghavān* — King Indra; *stūyamānaḥ* *ca* — and being offered prayers; *bhārata* — O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; *upagīyamānaḥ* — being sung before; *lalitam* — very sweetly; *āsthāna* — in his assembly; *adhyāsana*-*āśritaḥ* — situated on the throne; *pāṇḍureṇa* — white; *ātapatreṇa* — with an umbrella over the head; *candra*-*maṇḍala*-*cāruṇā* — as beautiful as the circle of the moon; *yuktaḥ* — endowed; *ca* *anyaiḥ* — and by other; *pārameṣṭhyaiḥ* — symptoms of an exalted king; *cāmara* — by yak-tail; *vyajana*-*ādibhiḥ* — fans and other paraphernalia; *virājamānaḥ* — shining; *paulamyā* — his wife, Śacī; *saha* — with; *ardha*-*āsanayā* — who occupied half the throne; *bhṛśam* — greatly; *saḥ* — he (Indra); *yadā* — when; *parama*-*ācāryam* — the most exalted *ācārya,* spiritual master; *devānām* — of all the demigods; *ātmanaḥ* — of himself; *ca* — and; *ha* — indeed; *na* — not; *abhyanandata* — welcomed; *samprāptam* — having appeared in the assembly; *pratyutthāna* — by getting up from the throne; *āsana*-*ādibhiḥ* — and by a seat and other greetings; *vācaspatim* — the priest of the demigods, Bṛhaspati; *muni*-*varam* — the best of all the sages; *sura*-*asura*-*namaskṛtam* — who is respected by both the demigods and the *asuras*; *na* — not; *uccacāla* — did get up; *āsanāt* — from the throne; *indraḥ* — Indra; *paśyan* *api* — although seeing; *sabhā*-*āgatam* — entering the assembly.

### Translation

**Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, once upon a time, the King of heaven, Indra, being extremely proud because of his great opulence of the three worlds, transgressed the law of Vedic etiquette. Seated on his throne, he was surrounded by the Maruts, Vasus, Rudras, Ādityas, Ṛbhus, Viśvadevas, Sādhyas, Aśvinī-kumāras, Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Gandharvas and by great saintly persons. Also surrounding him were the Vidyādharas, Apsarās, Kinnaras, Patagas \[birds\] and Uragas \[snakes\]. All of them were offering Indra their respects and services, and the Apsarās and Gandharvas were dancing and singing with very sweet musical instruments. Over Indra’s head was a white umbrella as effulgent as the full moon. Fanned by yak-tail whisks and served with all the paraphernalia of a great king, Indra was sitting with his wife, Śacīdevī, who occupied half the throne, when the great sage Bṛhaspati appeared in that assembly. Bṛhaspati, the best of the sages, was the spiritual master of Indra and the demigods and was respected by the demigods and demons alike. Nevertheless, although Indra saw his spiritual master before him, he did not rise from his own seat or offer a seat to his spiritual master, nor did Indra offer him a respectful welcome. Indra did nothing to show him respect.**

## Text 9

### Devanagari

ततो निर्गत्य सहसा कविराङ्गिरस- प्रभु- ।  
आययौ स्वगृहं तूष्णीं विद्वान्श्रीमदविक्रियाम् ॥ ९ ॥

### Verse text

*tato nirgatya sahasā  
kavir āṅgirasaḥ prabhuḥ  
āyayau sva-gṛhaṁ tūṣṇīṁ  
vidvān śrī-mada-vikriyām*

### Synonyms

*tataḥ* — thereafter; *nirgatya* — going out; *sahasā* — suddenly; *kaviḥ* — the great learned sage; *āṅgirasaḥ* — Bṛhaspati; *prabhuḥ* — the master of the demigods; *āyayau* — returned; *sva*-*gṛham* — to his home; *tūṣṇīm* — being silent; *vidvān* — having known; *śrī*-*mada*-*vikriyām* — deterioration because of madness due to opulence.

### Translation

**Bṛhaspati knew everything that would happen in the future. Seeing Indra’s transgression of etiquette, he completely understood that Indra was puffed up by his material opulence. Although able to curse Indra, he did not do so. Instead, he left the assembly and in silence returned to his home.**

## Text 10

### Devanagari

तर्ह्येव प्रतिबुध्येन्द्रो गुरुहेलनमात्मन- ।  
गर्हयामास सदसि स्वयमात्मानमात्मना ॥ १० ॥

### Verse text

*tarhy eva pratibudhyendro  
guru-helanam ātmanaḥ  
garhayām āsa sadasi  
svayam ātmānam ātmanā*

### Synonyms

*tarhi* — then, immediately; *eva* — indeed; *pratibudhya* — realizing; *indraḥ* — King Indra; *guru*-*helanam* — disrespect to the spiritual master; *ātmanaḥ* — his own; *garhayām* *āsa* — reproached; *sadasi* — in that assembly; *svayam* — personally; *ātmānam* — himself; *ātmanā* — by himself.

### Translation

**Indra, the King of heaven, could immediately understand his mistake. Realizing he had disrespected his spiritual master, he condemned himself in the presence of all the members of the assembly.**

## Text 11

### Devanagari

अहो बत मयासाधु कृतं वै दभ्रबुद्धिना ।  
यन्मयैश्वर्यमत्तेन गुरु- सदसि कात्कृत- ॥ ११ ॥

### Verse text

*aho bata mayāsādhu  
kṛtaṁ vai dabhra-buddhinā  
yan mayaiśvarya-mattena  
guruḥ sadasi kātkṛtaḥ*

### Synonyms

*aho* — alas; *bata* — indeed; *mayā* — by me; *asādhu* — disrespectful; *kṛtam* — the action done; *vai* — certainly; *dabhra*-*buddhinā* — being of less intelligence; *yat* — because; *mayā* — by me; *aiśvarya*-*mattena* — being very proud of material opulence; *guruḥ* — the spiritual master; *sadasi* — in this assembly; *kāt*-*kṛtaḥ* — mistreated.

### Translation

**Alas, what a regrettable deed I have committed because of my lack of intelligence and my pride in my material opulences. I failed to show respect to my spiritual master when he entered this assembly, and thus I have insulted him.**

## Text 12

### Devanagari

को गृध्येत्पण्डितो लक्ष्मीं त्रिपिष्टपपतेरपि ।  
ययाहमासुरं भावं नीतोऽद्य विबुधेश्वर- ॥ १२ ॥

### Verse text

*ko gṛdhyet paṇḍito lakṣmīṁ  
tripiṣṭapa-pater api  
yayāham āsuraṁ bhāvaṁ  
nīto ’dya vibudheśvaraḥ*

### Synonyms

*kaḥ* — who; *gṛdhyet* — would accept; *paṇḍitaḥ* — a learned man; *lakṣmīm* — opulences; *tri*-*piṣṭa*-*pa*-*pateḥ* *api* — although I am the King of the demigods; *yayā* — by which; *aham* — I; *āsuram* — demoniac; *bhāvam* — mentality; *nītaḥ* — carried to; *adya* — now; *vibudha* — of the demigods, who are in the mode of goodness; *īśvaraḥ* — the King.

### Translation

**Although I am King of the demigods, who are situated in the mode of goodness, I was proud of a little opulence and polluted by false ego. Under the circumstances, who in this world would accept such riches at the risk of falling down? Alas! I condemn my wealth and opulence.**

### Purport

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu prayed to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, *na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagad-īśa kāmaye:* “O my Lord, I do not aspire for material opulence or wealth, nor do I want a great number of followers to accept me as their leader, nor do I want a very beautiful wife to please me.” *Mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi:* “I do not even want liberation. All I want, life after life, is to be a faithful servant of Your Lordship.” According to the laws of nature, when one is extremely opulent one becomes degraded, and this is true both individually and collectively. The demigods are situated in the mode of goodness, but sometimes even one who is situated in such an exalted position as King Indra, the king of all the demigods, falls down because of material opulence. We are now actually seeing this in America. The entire American nation has tried to advance in material opulence without striving to produce ideal human beings. The result is that Americans are now regretting the wholesale criminality of American society and are wondering how America has become so lawless and unmanageable. As stated in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (7.5.31), *na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum:* persons who are unenlightened do not know the aim of life, which is to return home, back to Godhead. Therefore, both individually and collectively, they try to enjoy so-called material comforts, and they become addicted to wine and women. The men produced in such a society are less than fourth class. They are the unwanted population known as *varṇa-saṅkara,* and as stated in *Bhagavad-gītā,* an increase of *varṇa-saṅkara* population creates a hellish society. This is the society in which Americans now find themselves.

Fortunately, however, the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement has come to America, and many fortunate young men are giving serious attention to this movement, which is creating ideal men of first-class character, men who completely refrain from meat-eating, illicit sex, intoxication and gambling. If the American people are serious about curbing the degraded criminal life of their nation, they must take to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and try to create the kind of human society advised in *Bhagavad-gītā* (*cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ*). They must divide their society into first-class men, second-class men, third-class men and fourth-class men. Since they are now creating only men who are less than fourth class, how can they avoid the dangers of a criminal society? Long, long ago, Lord Indra regretted his disrespect to his spiritual master, Bṛhaspati. Similarly, it is advised that the American people regret their mistaken advancement in civilization. They should take advice from the spiritual master, the representative of Kṛṣṇa. If they do so, they will be happy, and theirs will be an ideal nation to lead the entire world.

## Text 13

### Devanagari

य- पारमेष्ठ्यं धिषणमधितिष्ठन्न कञ्चन ।  
प्रत्युत्तिष्ठेदिति ब्रूयुर्धर्मं ते न परं विदु- ॥ १३ ॥

### Verse text

*yaḥ pārameṣṭhyaṁ dhiṣaṇam  
adhitiṣṭhan na kañcana  
pratyuttiṣṭhed iti brūyur  
dharmaṁ te na paraṁ viduḥ*

### Synonyms

*yaḥ* — anyone who; *pārameṣṭhyam* — royal; *dhiṣaṇam* — throne; *adhitiṣṭhan* — sitting on; *na* — not; *kañcana* — anyone; *pratyuttiṣṭhet* — should rise before; *iti* — thus; *brūyuḥ* — those who say; *dharmam* — the codes of religion; *te* — they; *na* — not; *param* — higher; *viduḥ* — know.

### Translation

**If a person says, “One who is situated on the exalted throne of a king should not stand up to show respect to another king or a brāhmaṇa,” it is to be understood that he does not know the superior religious principles.**

### Purport

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says in this regard that when a president or king is sitting on his throne, he does not need to show respect to everyone who comes within his assembly, but he must show respect to superiors like his spiritual master, *brāhmaṇas* and Vaiṣṇavas. There are many examples of how he should act. When Lord Kṛṣṇa was sitting on His throne and Nārada fortunately entered His assembly, even Lord Kṛṣṇa immediately stood up with His officers and ministers to offer respectful obeisances to Nārada. Nārada knew that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Kṛṣṇa knew that Nārada was His devotee, but although Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord and Nārada is the Lord’s devotee, the Lord observed the religious etiquette. Since Nārada was a *brahmacārī,* a *brāhmaṇa* and an exalted devotee, even Kṛṣṇa, while acting as a king, offered His respectful obeisances unto Nārada. Such is the conduct visible in the Vedic civilization. A civilization in which the people do not know how the representative of Nārada and Kṛṣṇa should be respected, how society should be formed and how one should advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness — a society concerned only with manufacturing new cars and new skyscrapers every year and then breaking them to pieces and making new ones — may be technologically advanced, but it is not a human civilization. A human civilization is advanced when its people follow the *cātur-varṇya* system, the system of four orders of life. There must be ideal, first-class men to act as advisors, second-class men to act as administrators, third-class men to produce food and protect cows, and fourth-class men who obey the three higher classes of society. One who does not follow the standard system of society should be considered a fifth-class man. A society without Vedic laws and regulations will not be very helpful to humanity. As stated in this verse, *dharmaṁ te na paraṁ viduḥ:* such a society does not know the aim of life and the highest principle of religion.

## Text 14

### Devanagari

तेषां कुपथदेष्टृणां पततां तमसि ह्यध- ।  
ये श्रद्दध्युर्वचस्ते वै मज्जन्त्यश्मप्लवा इव ॥ १४ ॥

### Verse text

*teṣāṁ kupatha-deṣṭṝṇāṁ  
patatāṁ tamasi hy adhaḥ  
ye śraddadhyur vacas te vai  
majjanty aśma-plavā iva*

### Synonyms

*teṣām* — of them (the misleaders); *ku*-*patha*-*deṣṭṝṇām* — who show the path of danger; *patatām* — themselves falling; *tamasi* — in darkness; *hi* — indeed; *adhaḥ* — down; *ye* — anyone who; *śraddadhyuḥ* — place faith in; *vacaḥ* — the words; *te* — they; *vai* — indeed; *majjanti* — sink; *aśma*-*plavāḥ* — boats made of stone; *iva* — like.

### Translation

**Leaders who have fallen into ignorance and who mislead people by directing them to the path of destruction \[as described in the previous verse\] are, in effect, boarding a stone boat, and so too are those who blindly follow them. A stone boat would be unable to float and would sink in the water with its passengers. Similarly, those who mislead people go to hell, and their followers go with them.**

### Purport

As stated in the Vedic literature (*Bhāg.* 11.20.17):

*nṛ-deham ādyaṁ sulabhaṁ sudurlabhaṁ  
plavaṁ sukalpaṁ guru-karṇa-dhāram*

We, the conditioned souls, have fallen in the ocean of nescience, but the human body fortunately provides us a good opportunity to cross the ocean because the human body is like a very good boat. When directed by a spiritual master acting as the captain, the boat can very easily cross the ocean. Furthermore, the boat is helped across by favorable winds, which are the instructions of Vedic knowledge. If one does not take advantage of all these facilities to cross the ocean of nescience, he is certainly committing suicide.

One who boards a boat made of stone is doomed. To be elevated to the stage of perfection, humanity must first give up false leaders who present boats of stone. All of human society is in such a dangerous position that to be rescued it must abide by the standard instructions of the *Vedas.* The cream of these instructions appears in the form of *Bhagavad-gītā.* One should not take shelter of any other instructions, for *Bhagavad-gītā* gives direct instructions on how to fulfill the aim of human life. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa therefore says, *sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja:* “Give up all other processes of religion and simply surrender to Me.” Even if one does not accept Lord Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, His instructions are so exalted and beneficial for humanity that if one follows His instructions one will be saved. Otherwise one will be cheated by unauthorized meditation and gymnastic methods of *yoga.* Thus one will board a boat of stone, which will sink and drown all its passengers. Unfortunately, although the American people are extremely eager to get out of materialistic chaos, they are sometimes found to patronize the makers of stone boats. That will not help them. They must take the proper boat offered by Kṛṣṇa in the form of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Then they will be easily saved. In this regard Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments: *aśmamayaḥ plavo yeṣāṁ te yathā majjantaṁ plavam anumajjanti tatheti rāja-nīty-upadeṣṭṛṣu sva-sabhyeṣu kopo vyañjitaḥ.* If society is guided by political diplomacy, with one nation maneuvering against another, it will certainly sink like a stone boat. Political maneuvering and diplomacy will not save human society. People must take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness to understand the aim of life, to understand God, and to fulfill the human mission.

## Text 15

### Devanagari

अथाहममराचार्यमगाधधिषणं द्विजम् ।  
प्रसादयिष्ये निशठ- शीर्ष्णा तच्चरणं स्पृशन् ॥ १५ ॥

### Verse text

*athāham amarācāryam  
agādha-dhiṣaṇaṁ dvijam  
prasādayiṣye niśaṭhaḥ  
śīrṣṇā tac-caraṇaṁ spṛśan*

### Synonyms

*atha* — therefore; *aham* — I; *amara*-*ācāryam* — the spiritual master of the demigods; *agādha*-*dhiṣaṇam* — whose spiritual knowledge is deep; *dvijam* — the perfect *brāhmaṇa*; *prasādayiṣye* — I shall please; *niśaṭhaḥ* — without duplicity; *śīrṣṇā* — with my head; *tat*-*caraṇam* — his lotus feet; *spṛśan* — touching.

### Translation

**King Indra said: Therefore with great frankness and without duplicity I shall now bow my head at the lotus feet of Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods. Because he is in the mode of goodness, he is fully aware of all knowledge and is the best of the brāhmaṇas. Now I shall touch his lotus feet and offer my obeisances unto him to try to satisfy him.**

### Purport

Coming to his senses, King Indra realized that he was not a very sincere disciple of his spiritual master, Bṛhaspati. Therefore he decided that henceforward he would be *niśaṭha,* nonduplicitous. *Niśaṭhaḥ śīrṣṇa-tac-caraṇaṁ spṛśan:* he decided to touch his head to the feet of his spiritual master. From this example, we should learn this principle enunciated by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura:

*yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo  
yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto ’pi*

“By the mercy of the spiritual master one is benedicted by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Without the grace of the spiritual master, one cannot make any advancement.” A disciple should never be a hypocrite or be unfaithful to his spiritual master. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (11.17.27), the spiritual master is also called *ācārya.* *Ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān:* the Supreme Personality of Godhead says that one should respect the spiritual master, accepting him as the Lord Himself. *Nāvamanyeta karhicit:* one should not disrespect the *ācārya* at any time. *Na martya-buddhyāsūyeta:* one should never think the *ācārya* an ordinary person. Familiarity sometimes breeds contempt, but one should be very careful in one’s dealings with the *ācārya.* *Agādha-dhiṣaṇaṁ dvijam:* *the ācārya* is a perfect *brāhmaṇa* and has unlimited intelligence in guiding the activities of his disciple. Therefore Kṛṣṇa advises in *Bhagavad-gītā* (4.34):

*tad viddhi praṇipātena  
paripraśnena sevayā  
upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ  
jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ*

“Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.” One should fully surrender unto the spiritual master. and with service (*sevayā*) one should approach him for further spiritual enlightenment.

## Text 16

### Devanagari

एवं चिन्तयतस्तस्य मघोनो भगवान् गृहात् ।  
बृहस्पतिर्गतोऽद‍ृष्टां गतिमध्यात्ममायया ॥ १६ ॥

### Verse text

*evaṁ cintayatas tasya  
maghono bhagavān gṛhāt  
bṛhaspatir gato ’dṛṣṭāṁ  
gatim adhyātma-māyayā*

### Synonyms

*evam* — thus; *cintayataḥ* — while thinking very seriously; *tasya* — he; *maghonaḥ* — Indra; *bhagavān* — the most powerful; *gṛhāt* — from his home; *bṛhaspatiḥ* — Bṛhaspati; *gataḥ* — went; *adṛṣṭām* — invisible; *gatim* — to a state; *adhyātma* — due to being highly elevated in spiritual consciousness; *māyayā* — by his potency.

### Translation

**While Indra, the King of the demigods, thought in this way and repented in his own assembly, Bṛhaspati, the most powerful spiritual master, understood his mind. Thus he became invisible to Indra and left home, for Bṛhaspati was spiritually more powerful than King Indra.**

## Text 17

### Devanagari

गुरोर्नाधिगत- सञ्ज्ञां परीक्षन् भगवान् स्वराट् ।  
ध्यायन् धिया सुरैर्युक्त- शर्म नालभतात्मन- ॥ १७ ॥

### Verse text

*guror nādhigataḥ saṁjñāṁ  
parīkṣan bhagavān svarāṭ  
dhyāyan dhiyā surair yuktaḥ  
śarma nālabhatātmanaḥ*

### Synonyms

*guroḥ* — of his spiritual master; *na* — not; *adhigataḥ* — finding; *saṁjñām* — trace; *parīkṣan* — searching vigorously all around; *bhagavān* — the most powerful Indra; *svarāṭ* — independent; *dhyāyan* — meditating; *dhiyā* — by wisdom; *suraiḥ* — by the demigods; *yuktaḥ* — surrounded; *śarma* — peace; *na* — not; *alabhata* — obtained; *ātmanaḥ* — of the mind.

### Translation

**Although Indra searched vigorously with the assistance of the other demigods, he could not find Bṛhaspati. Then Indra thought, “Alas, my spiritual master has become dissatisfied with me, and now I have no means of achieving good fortune.” Although Indra was surrounded by demigods, he could not find peace of mind.**

## Text 18

### Devanagari

तच्छ्रुत्वैवासुरा- सर्व आश्रित्यौशनसं मतम् ।  
देवान् प्रत्युद्यमं चक्रुर्दुर्मदा आततायिन- ॥ १८ ॥

### Verse text

*tac chrutvaivāsurāḥ sarva  
āśrityauśanasaṁ matam  
devān pratyudyamaṁ cakrur  
durmadā ātatāyinaḥ*

### Synonyms

*tat* *śrutvā* — hearing that news; *eva* — indeed; *asurāḥ* — the demons; *sarve* — all; *āśritya* — taking shelter of; *auśanasam* — of Śukrācārya; *matam* — the instruction; *devān* — the demigods; *pratyudyamam* — action against; *cakruḥ* — performed; *durmadāḥ* — not very intelligent; *ātatāyinaḥ* — equipped with arms for fighting.

### Translation

**Hearing of the pitiable condition of King Indra, the demons, following the instructions of their guru, Śukrācārya, equipped themselves with weapons and declared war against the demigods.**

## Text 19

### Devanagari

तैर्विसृष्टेषुभिस्तीक्ष्णैर्निर्भिन्नाङ्गोरुबाहव- ।  
ब्रह्माणं शरणं जग्मु- सहेन्द्रा नतकन्धरा- ॥ १९ ॥

### Verse text

*tair visṛṣṭeṣubhis tīkṣṇair  
nirbhinnāṅgoru-bāhavaḥ  
brahmāṇaṁ śaraṇaṁ jagmuḥ  
sahendrā nata-kandharāḥ*

### Synonyms

*taiḥ* — by them (the demons); *visṛṣṭa* — thrown; *iṣubhiḥ* — by the arrows; *tīkṣṇaiḥ* — very sharp; *nirbhinna* — pierced all over; *aṅga* — bodies; *uru* — thighs; *bāhavaḥ* — and arms; *brahmāṇam* — of Lord Brahmā; *śaraṇam* — the shelter; *jagmuḥ* — approached; *saha*-*indrāḥ* — with King Indra; *nata*-*kandharāḥ* — their heads bent downward.

### Translation

**The demigods’ heads, thighs and arms and the other parts of their bodies were injured by the sharp arrows of the demons. The demigods, headed by Indra, saw no other course than to immediately approach Lord Brahmā with bowed heads for shelter and proper instruction.**

## Text 20

### Devanagari

तांस्तथाभ्यर्दितान्वीक्ष्य भगवानात्मभूरज- ।  
कृपया परया देव उवाच परिसान्त्वयन् ॥ २० ॥

### Verse text

*tāṁs tathābhyarditān vīkṣya  
bhagavān ātmabhūr ajaḥ  
kṛpayā parayā deva  
uvāca parisāntvayan*

### Synonyms

*tān* — them (the demigods); *tathā* — in that way; *abhyarditān* — afflicted by the weapons of the demons; *vīkṣya* — seeing; *bhagavān* — the most powerful; *ātma*-*bhūḥ* — Lord Brahmā; *ajaḥ* — who was not born like an ordinary human being; *kṛpayā* — out of causeless mercy; *parayā* — great; *devaḥ* — Lord Brahmā; *uvāca* — said; *parisāntvayan* — pacifying them.

### Translation

**When the most powerful Lord Brahmā saw the demigods coming toward him, their bodies gravely injured by the arrows of the demons, he pacified them by his great causeless mercy and spoke as follows.**

## Text 21

### Devanagari

श्रीब्रह्मोवाच  
अहो बत सुरश्रेष्ठा ह्यभद्रं व- कृतं महत् ।  
ब्रह्मिष्ठं ब्राह्मणं दान्तमैश्वर्यान्नाभ्यनन्दत ॥ २१ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-brahmovāca  
*aho bata sura-śreṣṭhā  
hy abhadraṁ vaḥ kṛtaṁ mahat  
brahmiṣṭhaṁ brāhmaṇaṁ dāntam  
aiśvaryān nābhyanandata*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*brahmā* *uvāca* — Lord Brahmā said; *aho* — alas; *bata* — it is very astonishing; *sura*-*śreṣṭhāḥ* — O best of the demigods; *hi* — indeed; *abhadram* — injustice; *vaḥ* — by you; *kṛtam* — done; *mahat* — great; *brahmiṣṭham* — a person fully obedient to the Supreme Brahman; *brāhmaṇam* — a *brāhmaṇa*; *dāntam* — who has fully controlled the mind and senses; *aiśvaryāt* — because of your material opulence; *na* — not; *abhyanandata* — welcomed properly.

### Translation

**Lord Brahmā said: O best of the demigods, unfortunately, because of madness resulting from your material opulence, you failed to receive Bṛhaspati properly when he came to your assembly. Because he is aware of the Supreme Brahman and fully in control of his senses, he is the best of the brāhmaṇas. Therefore it is very astonishing that you have acted impudently toward him.**

### Purport

Lord Brahmā recognized the brahminical qualifications of Bṛhaspati, who was the spiritual master of the demigods because of his awareness of the Supreme Brahman. Bṛhaspati was very much in control of his senses and mind, and therefore he was a most qualified *brāhmaṇa.* Lord Brahmā chastised the demigods for not properly respecting this *brāhmaṇa,* who was their *guru.* Lord Brahmā wanted to impress upon the demigods that one’s *guru* should not be disrespected under any circumstances. When Bṛhaspati entered the assembly of the demigods, they and their king, Indra, took him for granted. Since he came every day, they thought, they did not need to show him special respect. As it is said, familiarity breeds contempt. Being very much displeased, Bṛhaspati immediately left Indra’s palace. Thus all the demigods, headed by Indra, became offenders at the lotus feet of Bṛhaspati, and Lord Brahmā, being aware of this, condemned their neglect. In a song we sing every day, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, *cakṣu-dāna dila yei, janme janme prabhu sei:* the *guru* gives spiritual insight to the disciple, and therefore the *guru* should be considered his master, life after life. Under no circumstances should the *guru* be disrespected, but the demigods, being puffed up by their material possessions, were disrespectful to their *guru.* Therefore *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (11.17.27) advises, *ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān nāvamanyeta karhicit/ na martya-buddhyāsūyeta:* the *ācārya* should always be offered respectful obeisances; one should never envy the *ācārya,* considering him an ordinary human being.

## Text 22

### Devanagari

तस्यायमनयस्यासीत् परेभ्यो व- पराभव- ।  
प्रक्षीणेभ्य- स्ववैरिभ्य- समृद्धानां च यत्सुरा- ॥ २२ ॥

### Verse text

*tasyāyam anayasyāsīt  
parebhyo vaḥ parābhavaḥ  
prakṣīṇebhyaḥ sva-vairibhyaḥ  
samṛddhānāṁ ca yat surāḥ*

### Synonyms

*tasya* — that; *ayam* — this; *anayasya* — of your ungrateful activity; *āsīt* — was; *parebhyaḥ* — by others; *vaḥ* — of all of you; *parābhavaḥ* — the defeat; *prakṣīṇebhyaḥ* — although they were weak; *sva*-*vairibhyaḥ* — by your own enemies, who were previously defeated by you; *samṛddhānām* — being yourselves very opulent; *ca* — and; *yat* — which; *surāḥ* — O demigods.

### Translation

**Because of your misbehavior toward Bṛhaspati, you have been defeated by the demons. My dear demigods, since the demons were weak, having been defeated by you several times, how else could you, who were so advanced in opulence, be defeated by them?**

### Purport

The *devas* are celebrated for fighting with the *asuras* perpetually. In such fights the *asuras* were always defeated, but this time the demigods were defeated. Why? The reason, as stated here, was that they had offended their spiritual master. Their impudent disrespect of their spiritual master was the cause of their defeat by the demons. As stated in the *śāstras,* when one disrespects a respectable superior, one loses his longevity and the results of his pious activities, and in this way one is degraded.

## Text 23

### Devanagari

मघवन् द्विषत- पश्य प्रक्षीणान् गुर्वतिक्रमात् ।  
सम्प्रत्युपचितान् भूय- काव्यमाराध्य भक्तित- ।  
आददीरन्निलयनं ममापि भृगुदेवता- ॥ २३ ॥

### Verse text

*maghavan dviṣataḥ paśya  
prakṣīṇān gurv-atikramāt  
sampraty upacitān bhūyaḥ  
kāvyam ārādhya bhaktitaḥ  
ādadīran nilayanaṁ  
mamāpi bhṛgu-devatāḥ*

### Synonyms

*maghavan* — O Indra; *dviṣataḥ* — your enemies; *paśya* — just see; *prakṣīṇān* — being very weak (formerly); *guru*-*atikramāt* — because of disrespecting their *guru,* Śukrācārya; *samprati* — at the present moment; *upacitān* — powerful; *bhūyaḥ* — again; *kāvyam* — their spiritual master, Śukrācārya; *ārādhya* — worshiping; *bhaktitaḥ* — with great devotion; *ādadīran* — may take away; *nilayanam* — the abode, Satyaloka; *mama* — my; *api* — even; *bhṛgu*-*devatāḥ* — who are now strong devotees of Śukrācārya, the disciple of Bhṛgu.

### Translation

**O Indra, your enemies, the demons, were extremely weak because of their disrespect toward Śukrācārya, but since they have now worshiped Śukrācārya with great devotion, they have again become powerful. By their devotion to Śukrācārya, they have increased their strength so much that now they are even able to easily seize my abode from me.**

### Purport

Lord Brahmā wanted to point out to the demigods that by the strength of the *guru* one can become most powerful within this world, and by the displeasure of the *guru* one can lose everything. This is confirmed by the song of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura:

*yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo  
yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto ’pi*

“By the mercy of the spiritual master one is benedicted by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Without the grace of the spiritual master, one cannot make any advancement.” Although the demons are insignificant in comparison to Lord Brahmā, because of the strength of their *guru* they were so powerful that they could even seize Brahmaloka from Lord Brahmā. We therefore pray to the spiritual master:

*mūkaṁ karoti vācālaṁ  
paṅguṁ laṅghayate girim  
yat-kṛpā tam ahaṁ vande  
śrī-guruṁ dīna-tāraṇam*

(*Madhya* 17.80)

By the mercy of the *guru,* even a dumb man can become the greatest orator, and even a lame man can cross mountains. As advised by Lord Brahmā, one should remember this śāstric injunction if one desires success in his life.

## Text 24

### Devanagari

त्रिपिष्टपं किं गणयन्त्यभेद्य-  
मन्त्रा भृगूणामनुशिक्षितार्था- ।  
न विप्रगोविन्दगवीश्वराणां  
भवन्त्यभद्राणि नरेश्वराणाम् ॥ २४ ॥

### Verse text

*tripiṣṭapaṁ kiṁ gaṇayanty abhedya-  
mantrā bhṛgūṇām anuśikṣitārthāḥ  
na vipra-govinda-gav-īśvarāṇāṁ  
bhavanty abhadrāṇi nareśvarāṇām*

### Synonyms

*tri*-*piṣṭa*-*pam* — all the demigods, including Lord Brahmā; *kim* — what; *gaṇayanti* — they care for; *abhedya*-*mantrāḥ* — whose determination to carry out the orders of the spiritual master is unbreakable; *bhṛgūṇām* — of the disciples of Bhṛgu Muni like Śukrācārya; *anuśikṣita*-*arthāḥ* — deciding to follow the instructions; *na* — not; *vipra* — the *brāhmaṇas*; *govinda* — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; *go* — the cows; *īśvarāṇām* — of persons favoring or considering worshipable; *bhavanti* — are; *abhadrāṇi* — any misfortunes; *nara*-*īśvarāṇām* — or of kings who follow this principle.

### Translation

**Because of their firm determination to follow the instructions of Śukrācārya, his disciples, the demons, are now unconcerned about the demigods. In fact, kings or others who have determined faith in the mercy of brāhmaṇas, cows and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, and who always worship these three are always strong in their position.**

### Purport

From the instructions of Lord Brahmā it is understood that everyone should very faithfully worship the *brāhmaṇas,* the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the cows. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is *go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca:* He is always very kind to cows and *brāhmaṇas.* Therefore one who worships Govinda must satisfy Him by worshiping the *brāhmaṇas* and cows. If a government worships the *brāhmaṇas,* the cows and Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, it is never defeated anywhere; otherwise it must always be defeated and condemned everywhere. At the present moment, all over the world, governments have no respect for *brāhmaṇas,* cows and Govinda, and consequently there are chaotic conditions all over the world. In summary, although the demigods were very powerful in material opulence, the demons defeated them in battle because the demigods had behaved disrespectfully toward a *brāhmaṇa,* Bṛhaspati, who was their spiritual master.

## Text 25

### Devanagari

तद्विश्वरूपं भजताशु विप्रं  
तपस्विनं त्वाष्ट्रमथात्मवन्तम् ।  
सभाजितोऽर्थान् स विधास्यते वो  
यदि क्षमिष्यध्वमुतास्य कर्म ॥ २५ ॥

### Verse text

*tad viśvarūpaṁ bhajatāśu vipraṁ  
tapasvinaṁ tvāṣṭram athātmavantam  
sabhājito ’rthān sa vidhāsyate vo  
yadi kṣamiṣyadhvam utāsya karma*

### Synonyms

*tat* — therefore; *viśvarūpam* — Viśvarūpa; *bhajata* — just worship as *guru*; *āśu* — immediately; *vipram* — who is a perfect *brāhmaṇa*; *tapasvinam* — undergoing great austerities and penances; *tvāṣṭram* — the son of Tvaṣṭā; *atha* — as well as; *ātma*-*vantam* — very independent; *sabhājitaḥ* — being worshiped; *arthān* — the interests; *saḥ* — he; *vidhāsyate* — will execute; *vaḥ* — of all of you; *yadi* — if; *kṣamiṣyadhvam* — you tolerate; *uta* — indeed; *asya* — his; *karma* — activities (to support the Daityas).

### Translation

**O demigods, I instruct you to approach Viśvarūpa, the son of Tvaṣṭā, and accept him as your guru. He is a pure and very powerful brāhmaṇa undergoing austerity and penances. Pleased by your worship, he will fulfill your desires, provided that you tolerate his being inclined to side with the demons.**

### Purport

Lord Brahmā advised the demigods to accept the son of Tvaṣṭā as their spiritual master although he was always inclined toward the benefit of the *asuras.*

## Text 26

### Devanagari

श्रीशुक उवाच  
त एवमुदिता राजन् ब्रह्मणा विगतज्वरा- ।  
ऋषिं त्वाष्ट्रमुपव्रज्य परिष्वज्येदमब्रुवन् ॥ २६ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-śuka uvāca  
*ta evam uditā rājan  
brahmaṇā vigata-jvarāḥ  
ṛṣiṁ tvāṣṭram upavrajya  
pariṣvajyedam abruvan*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*śukaḥ* *uvāca* — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; *te* — all the demigods; *evam* — thus; *uditāḥ* — being advised; *rājan* — O King Parīkṣit; *brahmaṇā* — by Lord Brahmā; *vigata*-*jvarāḥ* — being relieved from the aggrievement caused by the demons; *ṛṣim* — the great sage; *tvāṣṭram* — to the son of Tvaṣṭā; *upavrajya* — going; *pariṣvajya* — embracing; *idam* — this; *abruvan* — spoke.

### Translation

**Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thus advised by Lord Brahmā and relieved of their anxiety, all the demigods went to the sage Viśvarūpa, the son of Tvaṣṭā. My dear King, they embraced him and spoke as follows.**

## Text 27

### Devanagari

श्रीदेवा ऊचु-  
वयं तेऽतिथय- प्राप्ता आश्रमं भद्रमस्तु ते ।  
काम- सम्पाद्यतां तात पितृणां समयोचित- ॥ २७ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-devā ūcuḥ  
*vayaṁ te ’tithayaḥ prāptā  
āśramaṁ bhadram astu te  
kāmaḥ sampādyatāṁ tāta  
pitṝṇāṁ samayocitaḥ*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*devāḥ* *ūcuḥ* — the demigods said; *vayam* — we; *te* — your; *atithayaḥ* — guests; *prāptāḥ* — arrived at; *āśramam* — your abode; *bhadram* — good fortune; *astu* — let there be; *te* — unto you; *kāmaḥ* — the desire; *sampādyatām* — let it be executed; *tāta* — O darling; *pitṝṇām* — of us, who are just like your fathers; *samayocitaḥ* — suitable to the present time.

### Translation

**The demigods said: Beloved Viśvarūpa, may there be all good fortune for you. We, the demigods, have come to your āśrama as your guests. Please try to fulfill our desires according to the time, since we are on the level of your parents.**

## Text 28

### Devanagari

पुत्राणां हि परो धर्म- पितृशुश्रूषणं सताम् ।  
अपि पुत्रवतां ब्रह्मन् किमुत ब्रह्मचारिणाम् ॥ २८ ॥

### Verse text

*putrāṇāṁ hi paro dharmaḥ  
pitṛ-śuśrūṣaṇaṁ satām  
api putravatāṁ brahman  
kim uta brahmacāriṇām*

### Synonyms

*putrāṇām* — of sons; *hi* — indeed; *paraḥ* — superior; *dharmaḥ* — religious principle; *pitṛ*-*śuśrūṣaṇam* — the service of the parents; *satām* — good; *api* — even; *putra*-*vatām* — of those who have sons; *brahman* — O dear *brāhmaṇa*; *kim* *uta* — what to speak; *brahmacāriṇām* — of *brahmacārīs.*.

### Translation

**O brāhmaṇa, the highest duty of a son, even though he has sons of his own, is to serve his parents, and what to speak of a son who is a brahmacārī?**

## Texts 29-30

### Devanagari

आचार्यो ब्रह्मणो मूर्ति- पिता मूर्ति- प्रजापते- ।  
भ्राता मरुत्पतेर्मूर्तिर्माता साक्षात् क्षितेस्तनु- ॥ २९ ॥  
दयाया भगिनी मूर्तिर्धर्मस्यात्मातिथि- स्वयम् ।  
अग्नेरभ्यागतो मूर्ति- सर्वभूतानि चात्मन- ॥ ३० ॥

### Verse text

*ācāryo brahmaṇo mūrtiḥ  
pitā mūrtiḥ prajāpateḥ  
bhrātā marutpater mūrtir  
mātā sākṣāt kṣites tanuḥ*

*dayāyā bhaginī mūrtir  
dharmasyātmātithiḥ svayam  
agner abhyāgato mūrtiḥ  
sarva-bhūtāni cātmanaḥ*

### Synonyms

*ācāryaḥ* — the teacher or spiritual master who instructs Vedic knowledge by his personal behavior; *brahmaṇaḥ* — of all the *Vedas*; *mūrtiḥ* — the personification; *pitā* — the father; *mūrtiḥ* — the personification; *prajāpateḥ* — of Lord Brahmā; *bhrātā* — the brother; *marut*-*pateḥ* *mūrtiḥ* — the personification of Indra; *mātā* — the mother; *sākṣāt* — directly; *kṣiteḥ* — of the earth; *tanuḥ* — the body; *dayāyāḥ* — of mercy; *bhaginī* — the sister; *mūrtiḥ* — the personification; *dharmasya* — of religious principles; *ātma* — the self; *atithiḥ* — the guest; *svayam* — personally; *agneḥ* — of the fire-god; *abhyāgataḥ* — the invited guest; *mūrtiḥ* — the personification; *sarva*-*bhūtāni* — all living entities; *ca* — and; *ātmanaḥ* — of the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu.

### Translation

**The ācārya, the spiritual master who teaches all the Vedic knowledge and gives initiation by offering the sacred thread, is the personification of all the Vedas. Similarly, a father personifies Lord Brahmā; a brother, King Indra; a mother, the planet earth; and a sister, mercy. A guest personifies religious principles, an invited guest personifies the demigod Agni, and all living entities personify Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.**

### Purport

According to the moral instructions of Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, *ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu:* one should observe all living entities to be on the same level as oneself. This means that no one should be neglected as inferior; because Paramātmā is seated in everyone’s body, everyone should be respected as a temple of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This verse describes the different ways in which one should respect a *guru,* a father, a brother, a sister, a guest and so on.

## Text 31

### Devanagari

तस्मात् पितृणामार्तानामार्तिं परपराभवम् ।  
तपसापनयंस्तात सन्देशं कर्तुमर्हसि ॥ ३१ ॥

### Verse text

*tasmāt pitṝṇām ārtānām  
ārtiṁ para-parābhavam  
tapasāpanayaṁs tāta  
sandeśaṁ kartum arhasi*

### Synonyms

*tasmāt* — therefore; *pitṝṇām* — of the parents; *ārtānām* — who are in distress; *ārtim* — the grief; *para*-*parābhavam* — being defeated by the enemies; *tapasā* — by the strength of your austerities; *apanayan* — taking away; *tāta* — O dear son; *sandeśam* — our desire; *kartum* *arhasi* — you deserve to execute.

### Translation

**Dear son, we have been defeated by our enemies, and therefore we are very much aggrieved. Please mercifully fulfill our desires by relieving our distress through the strength of your austerities. Please fulfill our prayers.**

## Text 32

### Devanagari

वृणीमहे त्वोपाध्यायं ब्रह्मिष्ठं ब्राह्मणं गुरुम् ।  
यथाञ्जसा विजेष्याम- सपत्नांस्तव तेजसा ॥ ३२ ॥

### Verse text

*vṛṇīmahe tvopādhyāyaṁ  
brahmiṣṭhaṁ brāhmaṇaṁ gurum  
yathāñjasā vijeṣyāmaḥ  
sapatnāṁs tava tejasā*

### Synonyms

*vṛṇīmahe* — we choose; *tvā* — you; *upādhyāyam* — as teacher and spiritual master; *brahmiṣṭham* — being perfectly aware of the Supreme Brahman; *brāhmaṇam* — a qualified *brāhmaṇa*; *gurum* — the perfect spiritual master; *yathā* — so that; *añjasā* — very easily; *vijeṣyāmaḥ* — we shall defeat; *sapatnān* — our rivals; *tava* — your; *tejasā* — by the power of austerity.

### Translation

**Since you are completely aware of the Supreme Brahman, you are a perfect brāhmaṇa, and therefore you are the spiritual master of all orders of life. We accept you as our spiritual master and director so that by the power of your austerity we may easily defeat the enemies who have conquered us.**

### Purport

One must approach a particular type of *guru* to execute a particular type of duty. Therefore although Viśvarūpa was inferior to the demigods, the demigods accepted him as their *guru* to conquer the demons.

## Text 33

### Devanagari

न गर्हयन्ति ह्यर्थेषु यविष्ठाङ्‌घ्य्रभिवादनम् ।  
छन्दोभ्योऽन्यत्र न ब्रह्मन् वयो ज्यैष्ठ्यस्य कारणम् ॥ ३३ ॥

### Verse text

*na garhayanti hy artheṣu  
yaviṣṭhāṅghry-abhivādanam  
chandobhyo ’nyatra na brahman  
vayo jyaiṣṭhyasya kāraṇam*

### Synonyms

*na* — not; *garhayanti* — forbid; *hi* — indeed; *artheṣu* — in acquiring interests; *yaviṣṭha*-*aṅghri* — at the lotus feet of a junior; *abhivādanam* — offering obeisances; *chandobhyaḥ* — the Vedic *mantras*; *anyatra* — apart from; *na* — not; *brahman* — O *brāhmaṇa*; *vayaḥ* — age; *jyaiṣṭhyasya* — of seniority; *kāraṇam* — the cause.

### Translation

**The demigods continued: Do not fear criticism for being younger than us. Such etiquette does not apply in regard to Vedic mantras. Except in relationship to Vedic mantras, seniority is determined by age, but one may offer respectful obeisances even to a younger person who is advanced in chanting Vedic mantras. Therefore although you are junior in relationship to us, you may become our priest without hesitation.**

### Purport

It is said, *vṛddhatvaṁ vayasā vinā:* one may be senior without being advanced in age. Even if one is not old, one gains seniority if he is senior in knowledge. Viśvarūpa was junior in relationship to the demigods because he was their nephew, but the demigods wanted to accept him as their priest, and therefore he would have to accept obeisances from them. The demigods explained that this should not be a cause for hesitation; he could become their priest because he was advanced in Vedic knowledge. Similarly. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita advises, *nīcād apy uttamaṁ jñānam:* one may accept education from a member of a lower social order. The *brāhmaṇas,* the members of the most elevated *varṇa,* are teachers, but a person in a lower family, such as a family of *kṣatriyas, vaiśyas* or even *śūdras,* may be accepted as a teacher if he has knowledge. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu approved of this when He expressed this opinion before Rāmānanda Rāya (*Cc. Madhya* 8.128):

*kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya  
yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei ‘guru’ haya*

It does not matter whether one is a *brāhmaṇa, śūdra, gṛhastha* or *sannyāsī.* These are all material designations. A spiritually advanced person has nothing to do with such designations. Therefore, if one is advanced in the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, regardless of his position in human society, he may become a spiritual master.

## Text 34

### Devanagari

श्रीऋषिरुवाच  
अभ्यर्थित- सुरगणै- पौरहित्ये महातपा- ।  
स विश्वरूपस्तानाह प्रसन्न- श्लक्ष्णया गिरा ॥ ३४ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-ṛṣir uvāca  
*abhyarthitaḥ sura-gaṇaiḥ  
paurahitye mahā-tapāḥ  
sa viśvarūpas tān āha  
prasannaḥ ślakṣṇayā girā*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*ṛṣiḥ* *uvāca* — Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak; *abhyarthitaḥ* — being requested; *sura*-*gaṇaiḥ* — by the demigods; *paurahitye* — in accepting the priesthood; *mahā*-*tapāḥ* — highly advanced in austerity and penances; *saḥ* — he; *viśvarūpaḥ* — Viśvarūpa; *tān* — to the demigods; *āha* — spoke; *prasannaḥ* — being satisfied; *ślakṣṇayā* — sweet; *girā* — with words.

### Translation

**Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When all the demigods requested the great Viśvarūpa to be their priest, Viśvarūpa, who was advanced in austerities, was very pleased. He replied to them as follows.**

## Text 35

### Devanagari

श्रीविश्‍वरूप उवाच  
विगर्हितं धर्मशीलैर्ब्रह्मवर्चउपव्ययम् ।  
कथं नु मद्विधो नाथा लोकेशैरभियाचितम् ।  
प्रत्याख्यास्यति तच्छिष्य- स एव स्वार्थ उच्यते ॥ ३५ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-viśvarūpa uvāca  
*vigarhitaṁ dharma-śīlair  
brahmavarca-upavyayam  
kathaṁ nu mad-vidho nāthā  
lokeśair abhiyācitam  
pratyākhyāsyati tac-chiṣyaḥ  
sa eva svārtha ucyate*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*viśvarūpaḥ* *uvāca* — Śrī Viśvarūpa said; *vigarhitam* — condemned; *dharma*-*śīlaiḥ* — by persons respectful to the religious principles; *brahma*-*varcaḥ* — of brahminical strength or power; *upavyayam* — causes loss; *katham* — how; *nu* — indeed; *mat*-*vidhaḥ* — a person like me; *nāthāḥ* — O lords; *loka*-*īśaiḥ* — by the ruling powers of different planets; *abhiyācitam* — request; *pratyākhyāsyati* — will refuse; *tat*-*śiṣyaḥ* — who is on the level of their disciple; *saḥ* — that; *eva* — indeed; *sva*-*arthaḥ* — real interest; *ucyate* — is described as.

### Translation

**Śrī Viśvarūpa said: O demigods, although the acceptance of priesthood is decried as causing the loss of previously acquired brahminical power, how can someone like me refuse to accept your personal request? You are all exalted commanders of the entire universe. I am your disciple and must take many lessons from you. Therefore I cannot refuse you. I must agree for my own benefit.**

### Purport

The professions of a qualified *brāhmaṇa* are *paṭhana, pāṭhana, yajana, yājana, dāna* and *pratigraha.* The words *yajana* and *yājana* mean that a *brāhmaṇa* becomes the priest of the populace for the sake of their elevation. One who accepts the post of spiritual master neutralizes the sinful reactions of the *yajamāna,* the one on whose behalf he performs *yajña.* Thus the results of the pious acts previously performed by the priest or spiritual master are diminished. Therefore priesthood is not accepted by learned *brāhmaṇas.* Nevertheless, the greatly learned *brāhmaṇa* Viśvarūpa became the priest of the demigods because of his profound respect for them.

## Text 36

### Devanagari

अकिञ्चनानां हि धनं शिलोञ्छनं  
तेनेह निर्वर्तितसाधुसत्क्रिय- ।  
कथं विगर्ह्यं नु करोम्यधीश्वरा-  
पौरोधसं हृष्यति येन दुर्मति- ॥ ३६ ॥

### Verse text

*akiñcanānāṁ hi dhanaṁ śiloñchanaṁ  
teneha nirvartita-sādhu-satkriyaḥ  
kathaṁ vigarhyaṁ nu karomy adhīśvarāḥ  
paurodhasaṁ hṛṣyati yena durmatiḥ*

### Synonyms

*akiñcanānām* — of persons who have taken to austerities and penances to become detached from worldly possessions; *hi* — certainly; *dhanam* — the wealth; *śila* — the collecting of grains left in the field; *uñchanam* — and the collecting of grains left in the wholesale marketplace; *tena* — by that means; *iha* — here; *nirvartita* — accomplishing; *sādhu* — of the exalted devotees; *sat*-*kriyaḥ* — all the pious activities; *katham* — how; *vigarhyam* — reproachable; *nu* — indeed; *karomi* — I shall execute; *adhīśvarāḥ* — O great governors of the planetary systems; *paurodhasam* — the duty of priesthood; *hṛṣyati* — is pleased; *yena* — by which; *durmatiḥ* — one who is less intelligent.

### Translation

**O exalted governors of various planets, the true brāhmaṇa, who has no material possessions, maintains himself by the profession of accepting śiloñchana. In other words, he picks up grains left in the field and on the ground in the wholesale marketplace. By this means, householder brāhmaṇas who actually abide by the principles of austerity and penance maintain themselves and their families and perform all necessary pious activities. A brāhmaṇa who desires to achieve happiness by gaining wealth through professional priesthood must certainly have a very low mind. How shall I accept such priesthood?**

### Purport

A first-class *brāhmaṇa* does not accept any rewards from his disciples or *yajamānas.* Practicing austerities and penances, he instead goes to the agricultural field and collects food grains left by the agriculturalists to be collected by *brāhmaṇas.* Similarly, such *brāhmaṇas* go to marketplaces where grains are purchased and sold wholesale, and there they collect grains left by the merchants. In this way, such exalted *brāhmaṇas* maintain their bodies and families. Such priests never demand anything from their disciples to live in opulence, imitating *kṣatriyas* or *vaiśyas.* In other words, a pure *brāhmaṇa* voluntarily accepts a life of poverty and lives in complete dependence on the mercy of the Lord. Not very many years ago, a *brāhmaṇa* in Kṛṣṇanagara, near Navadvīpa, was offered some help from the local Zamindar, Rājā Kṛṣṇacandra. The *brāhmaṇa* refused to accept the help. He said that since he was very happy in his householder life, taking rice given by his disciples and cooking vegetables of tamarind leaves, there was no question of taking help from the Zamindar. The conclusion is that although a *brāhmaṇa* may receive much opulence from his disciples, he should not utilize the rewards of his priesthood for his personal benefit; he must use them for the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

## Text 37

### Devanagari

तथापि न प्रतिब्रूयां गुरुभि- प्रार्थितं कियत् ।  
भवतां प्रार्थितं सर्वं प्राणैरर्थैश्च साधये ॥ ३७ ॥

### Verse text

*tathāpi na pratibrūyāṁ  
gurubhiḥ prārthitaṁ kiyat  
bhavatāṁ prārthitaṁ sarvaṁ  
prāṇair arthaiś ca sādhaye*

### Synonyms

*tathā* *api* — still; *na* — not; *pratibrūyām* — I may refuse; *gurubhiḥ* — by persons on the level of my spiritual master; *prārthitam* — request; *kiyat* — of small value; *bhavatām* — of all of you; *prārthitam* — the desire; *sarvam* — whole; *prāṇaiḥ* — by my life; *arthaiḥ* — by my possessions; *ca* — also; *sādhaye* — I shall execute.

### Translation

**All of you are my superiors. Therefore although accepting priesthood is sometimes reproachable, I cannot refuse even a small request from you. I agree to be your priest. I shall fulfill your request by dedicating my life and possessions.**

## Text 38

### Devanagari

श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच  
तेभ्य एवं प्रतिश्रुत्य विश्वरूपो महातपा- ।  
पौरहित्यं वृतश्चक्रे परमेण समाधिना ॥ ३८ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca  
*tebhya evaṁ pratiśrutya  
viśvarūpo mahā-tapāḥ  
paurahityaṁ vṛtaś cakre  
parameṇa samādhinā*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*bādarāyaṇiḥ* *uvāca* — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; *tebhyaḥ* — unto them (the demigods); *evam* — thus; *pratiśrutya* — promising; *viśvarūpaḥ* — Viśvarūpa; *mahā*-*tapāḥ* — the most exalted personality; *paurahityam* — the priesthood; *vṛtaḥ* — surrounded by them; *cakre* — executed; *parameṇa* — supreme; *samādhinā* — with attention.

### Translation

**Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King, after making this promise to the demigods, the exalted Viśvarūpa, surrounded by the demigods, performed the necessary priestly activities with great enthusiasm and attention.**

### Purport

The word *samādhinā* is very important. *Samādhi* means complete absorption with an undiverted mind. Viśvarūpa, who was a most learned *brāhmaṇa,* not only accepted the request of the demigods, but took their request seriously and performed the activities of priesthood with an undiverted mind. In other words, he accepted the priesthood not for material gain, but to profit the demigods. Such is the duty of a priest. The word *puraḥ* means “family,” and *hita* means “benefit.” Thus the word *purohita* indicates that the priest is the well-wisher of the family. Another meaning of the word *puraḥ* is “first.” A priest’s first duty is to see that his disciples benefit spiritually and materially by all means. Then he is satisfied. A priest should never be interested in performing Vedic rituals for his personal benefit.

## Text 39

### Devanagari

सुरद्विषां श्रियं गुप्तामौशनस्यापि विद्यया ।  
आच्छिद्यादान्महेन्द्राय वैष्णव्या विद्यया विभु- ॥ ३९ ॥

### Verse text

*sura-dviṣāṁ śriyaṁ guptām  
auśanasyāpi vidyayā  
ācchidyādān mahendrāya  
vaiṣṇavyā vidyayā vibhuḥ*

### Synonyms

*sura*-*dviṣām* — of the enemies of the demigods; *śriyam* — the opulence; *guptām* — protected; *auśanasya* — of Śukrācārya; *api* — although; *vidyayā* — by the talents; *ācchidya* — collecting; *adāt* — delivered; *mahā*-*indrāya* — unto King Indra; *vaiṣṇavyā* — of Lord Viṣṇu; *vidyayā* — by a prayer; *vibhuḥ* — the most powerful Viśvarūpa.

### Translation

**The opulence of the demons, who are generally known as the enemies of the demigods, was protected by the talents and tactics of Śukrācārya, but Viśvarūpa, who was most powerful, composed a protective prayer known as the Nārāyaṇa-kavaca. By this intelligent mantra, he took away the opulence of the demons and gave it to Mahendra, the King of heaven.**

### Purport

The distinction between the demigods (*devas*) and demons (*asuras*) is that the demigods are all devotees of Lord Viṣṇu whereas the demons are devotees of demigods like Lord Śiva, Goddess Kālī and Goddess Durgā. Sometimes the demons are also devotees of Lord Brahmā. For example, Hiraṇyakaśipu was a devotee of Lord Brahmā, Rāvaṇa was a devotee of Lord Śiva, and Mahiṣāsura was a devotee of Goddess Durgā. The demigods are devotees of Lord Viṣṇu (*viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva*), whereas the demons (*āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ*) are always against the *viṣṇu-bhaktas,* or Vaiṣṇavas. To oppose the Vaiṣṇavas, the demons become devotees of Lord Śiva, Lord Brahmā, Kālī, Durgā, and so on. In the days of yore, many long years ago, there was animosity between the *devas* and the *asuras,* and the same spirit still continues, for the devotees of Lord Śiva and Goddess Durgā are always envious of Vaiṣṇavas, who are devotees of Lord Viṣṇu. This strain between the devotees of Lord Śiva and Lord Viṣṇu has always existed. In the higher planetary systems, fights between the demons and the demigods continue for a long, long time.

Herein we see that Viśvarūpa made for the demigods a protective covering, saturated with a Viṣṇu *mantra.* Sometimes the Viṣṇu *mantra* is called Viṣṇu-jvara, and the Śiva *mantra* is called Śiva-jvara. We find in the *śāstras* that sometimes the Śiva-jvara and Viṣṇu-jvara are employed in the fights between the demons and the demigods.

The word *sura-dviṣām,* which in this verse means “of the enemies of the demigods,” also refers to the atheists. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* elsewhere says that Lord Buddha appeared for the purpose of bewildering the demons or atheists. The Supreme Personality of Godhead always awards His benediction to devotees. The Lord Himself confirms this in *Bhagavad-gītā* (9.31):

*kaunteya pratijānīhi  
na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati*

“O son of Kuntī, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.”

## Text 40

### Devanagari

यया गुप्त- सहस्राक्षो जिग्येऽसुरचमूर्विभु- ।  
तां प्राह स महेन्द्राय विश्वरूप उदारधी- ॥ ४० ॥

### Verse text

*yayā guptaḥ sahasrākṣo  
jigye ’sura-camūr vibhuḥ  
tāṁ prāha sa mahendrāya  
viśvarūpa udāra-dhīḥ*

### Synonyms

*yayā* — by which; *guptaḥ* — protected; *sahasra*-*akṣaḥ* — the thousand-eyed demigod, Indra; *jigye* — conquered; *asura* — of the demons; *camūḥ* — military power; *vibhuḥ* — becoming very powerful; *tām* — that; *prāha* — spoke; *saḥ* — he; *mahendrāya* — unto the King of heaven, Mahendra; *viśvarūpaḥ* — Viśvarūpa; *udāra*-*dhīḥ* — very broad-minded.

### Translation

**Viśvarūpa, who was most liberal, spoke to King Indra \[Sahasrākṣa\] the secret hymn that protected Indra and conquered the military power of the demons.**

### Purport

*Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sixth Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the* Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, *entitled “Indra Offends His Spiritual Master, Bṛhaspati.”*
