+++
title = "38 The Installation of the Image of Vāmana"

+++
 

## *Bhīṣma said*:

1\. O brāhmaṇa-sage, how did Rāma install (the image of) Vāmana at Kānyakubja? Where did he get him (i.e. the image)? Tell me (all this) in detail.

2\. O revered one, similarly the sweet words with which you described Rāma, gave pleasure to my ears.

3-4a. People look at Rāma with love and affection. Rāma, who knows virtue, who is grateful, who is firm in mind and who is well-composed, rules over the entire world righteously.

4b-5. When he is ruling the kingdom, trees are abundant and full of juice and satisfy all desires; there are various garments (easily available); the earth has (on it) exuberant growth (of corn etc.); great-souled men have no rivals.

6\. He has done a (good) deed for gods, since he easily destroyed Rāvaṇa, who was a nuisance to the world, along with his sons and ministers.

7\. O best brāhmaṇa, he thought of practising full virtue (i.e. practising virtue fully). O sage, I desire to hear his full life.

## *Pulastya spoke*:

8\. O king, listen with concentration to what Rāma did after he established himself on the path of virtue.

9-13a. He remembered that lord of demons (viz. Bibhīṣaṇa): ‘How will the demon viz. Bibhīṣaṇa, well-established in Laṅkā, be governing (his kingdom)? Hostility with gods is a sign of destruction. I have given him that kingdom (lasting) till the time of the moon and the sun (i.e. as long as the moon and the sun shine in the sky). If he does not perish, I shall have eternal and stable fame. Here (i.e. in the world) Rāvaṇa practised penance for his own destruction. That most sinful (demon) has now been destroyed as a mission of gods. Therefore now I should myself go and look for Bibhīṣaṇa. I should advise him what is good for him so that he would remain (there) permanently’.

13b-14a. When Rāma of unlimited lustre was thinking[^1] like this, Bharata came (there). Seeing Rāma he said this (i.e. these words):

[^1]:  Cintayataḥ—see ‘Sasmāra’ in 9 (a) above.

14b-15a. “O lord, O best among men, what are you thinking about? If it is not a secret about your mission for gods, or about a deed on the earth or about your own undertaking, then tell (it to) me.”

15b-20a. Rāghava said (these) words to Bharata who was speaking thus and standing there and contemplating: “There is nothing that is secret for you (i.e. I hide nothing from you). You are my external life; so also is Lakṣmaṇa of great fame. There is nothing that I have which should not be known by you (two). Take this to be the truth. This is my great anxiety as to how Bibhīṣaṇa, for whose well-being I destroyed Rāvaṇa, behaves with gods. Therefore I shall go to Laṅkā where that Bibhīṣaṇa resides. Having seen that city and having told the demon what ought to be done, and also having seen the entire earth and Sugrīva, the lord of monkeys, as well as having seen Śatrughna, the great king and my brothers’ sons on all sides (I shall come back).”

20b-2la. When the descendant of Kakutstha (i.e. Rāma) was speaking like this, Bharata who was standing in front of him, said (these) words to Rāghava: “I shall accompany you”.

2lb. “O you of mighty arms, let it be so. Let Lakṣmaṇa stay here.”

22\. Speaking like this to Bharata, Rāma said to Lakṣmaṇa (who was to remain) in the city: “O brave one, till we two-come back you have to protect (the subjects).”

23\. Having thus instructed Lakṣmaṇa, and having thought of the Puṣpaka, he, who enhanced the joy of Kausalyā, got into the plane.

24-26a. Puṣpaka then reached that region from where it was the Gāndhāra country (from where the Gāndhāra country started). Having seen Bharata’s sons, and having observed the behaviour of the world they went to the eastern direction where (there were) the two sons of Lakṣmaṇa. The two descendants of Raghu (viz. Rāma and Bharata), having stayed in those cities for six nights went in the plane towards the southern direction.

26b-27. Having paid homage to Prayāga, the place of the confluence of Gaṅgā and Yamuna, resorted to. by sages, and having paid obeisance to Bharadvāja, the two went to Atri’s hermitage. Having conversed with the sages there, they went to-Janasthāna.

## *Rāma said*:

28\. Formerly the wicked Rāvaṇa kidnapped here, Sitā, after having killed the vulture Jatāyus, who was the friend of our father.

29\. Here we had a great fight with that vile, accursed Kabandha. Sītā remained in Rāvaṇa’s house.

30-31 a. “On the excellent mountain Ṛṣyamūka lives a monkey named Sugrīva. He will help you. With your younger brother (Lakṣmaṇa) go to Pampā. Having reached the lake Pampā go to the female ascetic Śabarī.”

31b. Rāma who was thus told, was sad and had no hope for life.

32-33a. “O hero, this is that pond of lotuses at (i.e. by the side of) which Lakṣmaṇa said to me: ‘O best among men, O destroyer of enemies, do not grieve. When I am your obedient servant you will (re)gain Sītā.’

33b. Here I spent the months of the rainy season like a hundred years.

34-35. O you tormentor of the enemies, here only I killed Vālin for Sugrīva. O hero, this Kiṣkindhā, maintained by Vālin, where that virtuous lord of the monkeys, viz. Sugrīva, lives for a hundred years with the monkeys, is seen (now).”

36-37a. Then the two heroes, Bharata and Rāma, just went into the city. Seeing the two brothers that had arrived (there, Sugrīva) having saluted them, said these words:

37b. “O brave ones, where are you proceeding? What mission are you undertaking?”

38-42. Making them seated (i.e. offering them seats) he made a respectful offering to them. When thus the most righteous descendant of Raghu sat there in the court, Aṅgada, Hanūmān, Nala, Nīla and Pāṭala, and also Gaja, Gavākṣa, Gavaya and the very famous Panasa, the priests and ministers, astrologer Dadhivakraka, and Nīla, Śatabali, Mainda, Dvivida, Gandhamādana, Vīrabāhu, Subāhu, Vīrasena, Vināyaka, Kumuda—lustrous like the sun, Suṣeṇa—the chief of the herd of monkeys, Ṛṣabha, Vinata and Gava of a terrible valour, and also the king of the bears, Dhūmra came there with their armies.

43-44a. All the inmates of the harem, also Rumā, Tārā, similarly (ladies in) Aṅgada’s harem and other female attendants having incomparable joy, said: “Fine, fine”.

44b-45. The magnanimous monkeys with Sugrīva, also the very fortunate female monkeys like Tārā, having seen Rāma, with throats (choked) with tears, saluted and said to him:

46-47. “O lord, where is that respectable lady whom you had, after having totally vanquished Rāvaṇa, got purified in fire before my father and the lord of Umā (i.e. Śiva), and whom you had brought to this city? I am not seeing her before you. O you descendant of Raghu, you do not look charming without her.

48-49a. Nor does that chaste lady (look charming) without you. Where indeed is that Jānakī (now)? I do not know your having any other wife. You do not look charming without (your) wife, as the pair of the Krauñca birds or that of the Cakravāka birds (does not look charming without either of the mates, i.e. one of the two is not charming)”.

49b-51. Lotus-eyed Rāma, the best among speakers said to Tārā, having her face like the moon (and) who was speaking like this: “O you of fine teeth, O you of broad eyes, it is difficult to resist destiny (Kāla).[^2] Know that all this mobile and immobile world is fashioned by destiny.” Having dismissed all those ladies, Sugrīva stood before (Rāma).

[^2]:  Kālo hi... an oft-repeated saying in the Sanskrit laguage.

52\. Sugrīva said: “O lords of men, tell me quickly about that mission also for which you have come here. It is time to do what should be done.”

53-54a. Bharata, urged by Rāma, told Sugrīva, who was speaking like this, about Rāma’s going to Lankā. Sugrīva said to them, “With you I shall go to the city (of Laṅkā) to see the demon Bibhīṣaṇa, O lord.”

54b. Thus addressed by Sugrīva, Rāma said, “Go (i.e. accompany us).”

55\. The three, viz. Sugrīva and the two Rāghavas got into the Puṣpaka. Just then the plane reached the other shore of the ocean.

56-57. Rāma said to Bharata, “With four ministers, Bibhīṣaṇa the lord of demons, saw me here to save (i.e. so that I should save) his life. Then he was consecrated by Lakṣmaṇa on the throne of Laṅkā; and here, on the other shore of the ocean I lived for three days.

58\. (I thought): ‘He (i.e. the ocean) will appear before me and the mission of the kinsmen will be done;’ but, O you killer of enemies, he did not appear before me.

59\. O Rāghava, on the fourth day I became angry. I stretched my bow and held the divine missile in my hand.

60\. Seeing me (angry, the ocean) seeking shelter resorted to Lakṣmaṇa. I was pacified by Sugrīva (with the words): ‘O Rāghava, pardon him’.

61-62. Then the arrow discharged by me went off (and fell in) to the Maru country. Then the ocean-king, being very modest, said to me: ‘O Rāma, O best of men, build a bridge and go to Lankā (along it), (thus) crossing the great ocean full of water’.

63\. I have built this bridge on the ocean, the abode of Varuṇa. Within three days it was (i.e, its construction was) completed by the best monkeys.

64\. On the first day they constructed (its part of the length of) fourteen *Yojanas*. On the second day, they constructed (its part of the length of) thirty-six *Yojanas*, and on the third day (they constructed its part of the length of) half a hundred (i.e. fifty) *Yojanas*.

65\. This (i.e. here) is seen that Lankā with golden ramparts and portals. Here a great siege was laid by the best monkeys.

66\. On the fourteenth day of the bright half of Caitra a great battle took place here. (This is the place) where on the eighteenth day that Rāvaṇa was killed.

67\. Here Prahasta, the best among the demons, was killed by Nīla. Here Dhūmrākṣa was killed by Hanūmat.

68\. (Here) the maganimous Sugrīva killed Mahodara and Atikāya. Here Kumbhakarṇta was killed by me and Indrajit by Lakṣmaṇa.

69-70a. I also killed here Rāvaṇa, the best demon. Here arrived Brahmā, the grandsire of the worlds to talk (to me), and also the trident-holder, the bull-bannered (Śiva) along with Pārvatī.

70b. (Here) also (came) the hosts of gods led by the great Indra with Gandharvas and Kinnaras.

71\. The great king, my father, surrounded by groups of celestial nymphs and of Vidyādharas, also arrived from heaven.

72\. In the presence of all of them, I desiring Sītā’s purification, told her (to enter fire); she entered fire and was purified.

73-74. She was seen by the rulers of Laṅkā, gods and was accepted by me at the behest of my father. Then my father also said to me: ‘O son, go to Ayodhyā. O Rāghava, I do not very much like heaven without you. O son, you have emancipated me; I have reached Indra’s world.’

75\. The king (i.e. Daśaratha) also said to Lakṣamaṇa: ‘O son, you have earned religious merit. With your brother you will obtain (i.e. go to) best worlds.’

76-77a. Calling Sītā, the king said these words to her: ‘O you of a good vow, do not entertain anger against your husband. O you of auspicious eyes, your husband will get excellent fame’.”

77b-78. When Rāma was speaking like this, and when Puṣpaka came to a halt, the best demons that were there and the spies having quickly gone to Bibhīṣaṇa told him that Rāma had arrived with Sugrīva.

79\. And Bibhīṣaṇa, having heard about Rāma’s arrival in the vicinity, honoured the spies with (i.e. by satisfying) all their desires and with (i.e. by giving them) gold.

80-81a. Having adorned that city, he came out with his ministers. Seeing Rāma seated in the aeroplane like the sun on the Meru mountain, he saluted Rāma by the prostration of the eight parts of his body and said:

81b-83a. “My existence is fruitful today. All my desires are fulfilled, since I have seen the lord’s feet fit to be adored by the world. I am made respectable among the gods like Indra. I am regarding myself superior to Indra, the lord of gods”.

83b-84. When Rāvaṇa’s residence was illumined, being adorned by all (kinds of) gems and when Rāma was seated, Bibhīṣaṇa, having offered him a respectful oblation, and with the palms of his hands joined in obeisance said to Sugrīva and Bharata:

85-86a. “I do not have that which I can give to Rāma who has come here. Formerly, having killed his enemy, the sinner, the nuisance to the three worlds (viz. Rāvaṇa), Rāma gave this city of Laṅkā to me.

86b-87a. (O Rāma), all this—this city, these wives, these sons and (even) I (myself)—is given (to you). Let it be with you eternally.”

87b-88. Then all the subjects, and all those who were the residents of Lankā, being full of curiosity, came there to see Rāghava. They said to Bibhīṣaṇa: “O lord, show us Rāma”.

89-90. They were told (i.e. introduced) to Rāma by Bibhīṣaṇa. Bharata, directed by Rāma received all the presents offered by them; and the lord of the monkeys (i.e. Sugrīva) received the heap of the gems pouring in. Thus Rāma staged in the demon’s residence for three days.

91-92. When the fourth day came, and when he was (seated) in the court, Kekasī[^3] said these (words) to her son; “O son, I shall see Rāma. The sages obtain (i.e. have obtained) great religious merit when they saw him. This highly virtuous one is eternal Viṣṇu of four forms.

[^3]:  Kekasī—Mother of Bibhīṣaṇa.

93-94. O illustrious one, Sītā is Lakṣmī. She was not so regarded by your elder brother (i.e. Rāvaṇa). In the gathering of gods in heaven at a former time your father had said: ‘In the family of Raghus, Viṣṇu will be (born) as Daśaratha’s son in order to destroy the demon viz. Rāvaṇa.’”

95-97a. Bibbīṣaṇa said: “O mother, do so. Put on a new garment. See the prince (taking) with (you) a vessel with sandal, honey and sacred rice grains and *dūrvā*-grass as a respectful offering. Putting Saramā[^4] and other young divine ladies in front go near (i.e. approach) Rāghava. I (shall) then (just) go ahead.”

[^4]:  Saramā—Wife of Bibhīṣaṇa.

97b-98. Saying so, the demon went (to the place) where Rāma was seated. Having dismissed all the demons that had come there to see Rāma, and making the court clean, Bibhīṣaṇa said to Rāma who was sitting facing him:

99-100. “O god, O king, (please) listen to a request of me, who am telling it. O god, that mother of us, who gave birth to Rāvaṇa, Kumbhakarṇa and me desires to see your feet. Favour her and allow her to see you.”

101\. Rāma said: “O lord of demons, with a desire to meet her, I shall approach her. Quickly go before (i.e. lead) me”.

102\. Having made this statement (i.e. having said like this), Rāma got up from the excellent seat. Joining the palms of his hands and keeping them on his head in obeisance, the lord saluted (Bibhīṣaṇa’s mother and said to her:)

103-104. “I salute you. You are virtually my mother, O madam, if a man, as a result of his great penance and various (kinds of) religious merit, sees these feet of yours, he would be perfect. I am, therefore, pleased on seeing these, O you who love your sons.

105a. As Kausalyā is my mother, you are also my mother.”

105b-107a. Kekasī too said to Rāma: “Live long, be happy. O lord, my husband had told (me) that Viṣṇu, taking a hunan form had descended (i.e. was born) in the family of Raghu for the well-being of gods, for the destruction of Rāvaṇa and for granting prosperity to Bibhīṣaṇa.

107b-109. (He also told me that) that son of Daśaratha will do all this, viz. killing Vālin and constructing a bridge over the ocean. Recollecting those words ofmy husband, I have now recognised you. Sītā is Lakṣmī; you are Viṣṇu and the gods are monkeys. (Now) O son, I shall go home, obtain stable fame.”

110\. Saramā said: “Here only, Sītā who remained in the Aśokavana, was served by me. (I hope that) that your beloved Jānakī is happy.

111\. O you tormentor of your enemies, I daily remember the feet of Sītā. I am thinking as to when I shall (again) see Sītā.

112\. Why is it that the lord of gods has not brought Sītā here? Without that lady you, all alone, do not look charming.

113\. O you tormentor of enemies, Sītā looks charming in your company and you in her company.” When she was speaking thus Bharata said (these words); “Who is she?”

114\. Then Rāma, who knew the internal thoughts, quickly said to Bharata: “(She is) Bibhīṣaṇa’s wife by name Saramā.

115\. This virtuous one was Sītā’s friend, and was very much liked by her. Know that everything is wrought by destiny. I do not know what she will do (when she does not see Sītā).

116\. O you fortunate one, go and, O you auspicious one, look after your husband’s house. The respectable lady (viz. Sītā) has gone leaving me, as (an excellent) position leaves a luckless person.

117\. O you lady of beautiful eyebrows, I am not getting any delight; and (when) I wander here (i.e. on the earth) I find all the directions to be vacant.”

118\. He dismissed Saramā, the dear friend of Sītā (with these words). When Kekasī had left, Rāma said to Bibhīṣaṇa:

119\. “Do what is liked by gods. You should not offend the demons. O sinless one, you should behave by the order of king of kings.

120\. Any man, who somehow comes to Laṅkā should not he killed by demons. He should be looked upon as I (am).”

121\. Bibhīṣaṇa said: “O lord of men, I shall do all according to your order.” When Bibhīṣaṇa was speaking, Vāyu said to Rāma:

122\. “Here is the image of Viṣṇu that formerly restrained Bali. Take it and install it at Kānyakubja.”

123-124a. Understanding the purport of what Vāyu said, Bibhīṣaṇa having adorned (the image of) Vāmana with all jewels and having brought it (to Rāma) presented it to Rāma and said these words:

l24b-125. “O you lotus-eyed one, this (image of) Vāmana was brought when Meghanāda (i.e. Indrajit, the son of Rāvaṇa) vanquished Indra, O Rāghava. O lord, take (with you) this (image of) god of gods and install it.”

126-127. Saying, “All right,” Rāma got into the Puṣpaka. Taking immeasurable wealth, jewels and (the image of) Vāmana, Sugrīva and Bharata got into the plane after (the image of) Vāmana, the best of gods (was put into the plane). Rāma who was going into the sky (in the plane) said to Bibhīṣaṇa: “(Please) Wait.”

128\. Hearing the words of Rāma, he again said to Rāma: “O lord, I shall do all that you have ordered me.

129\. O best of kings, all men on the earth will come (to Laṅkā) along this bridge and will harass (us); and thus your command will be violated.

130a. What restriction should I observe here, and what is my duty, O lord?”

130b-131. Hearing these words spoken by the best demon, Rāma took his bow, and with it, broke the bridge into two. Then he quickly divided it at the centre into three parts of the length of ten *Yojanas*.

132-134. Breaking it again he divided into three parts, each of the length of a *Yojana*. (Then) having reached the Velāvana, and having worshipped the lord of Ramā (i.e. Viṣṇu), and sprinkling (the image of) Janārdana, the god of gods, named Rāmeśvara, and taking with him the image of Vāmana, the descendant of Raghu quickly went from the northern (beach) of the ocean. From the sky arose a voice, deep like the thunder of a cloud.

135-136a. Rudra said: “O Rāma, well-being to you. Now I am here. O Rāghava, as long as the earth remains, so long this your sacred place, viz. Setu will remain.”

136b-137. Hearing those nectar-like words of the lord of lords Rāma said: “O lord of gods, salutation to you, O you who grant fearlessness to your devotees. Salutation to you, O Gaurīkānta (i.e. husband of Pārvatī), Dakṣayajñavināśana (i.e. destroyer of Dakṣa’s sacrifice).

138-144. My constant salutation to Bhava, Sarva, Rudra, Varada, to the lord of beings, to Ugra, to Kapardin, to Mahādeva, Bhīma, Tryambaka, lord of quarters, Īśāna, Bhagaghna (i.e. killer of Bhaga), Andhakaghātin (i.e. the destroyer of Andhaka), to Nīlagrīva, Ghora, Vedhas, O you praised by the creator; to Kumāraśatrunighna (i.e. the killer of Kārtikeya’s enemy), Kumārajanana (i.e. Kumara’s father), to Vilohila, Dhūmra, Śiva, and to Krathana; my salutation to Nīlaśikhaṇḍa, Śūlin, Daityanāśin, Ugra, Trinetra, Hiraṇyavasuretas, Anindya, Ambikābhartṛ (i.e. the lord of Pārvatī), Sarvadevastuta (i.e. praised by all gods), Abhigamya, Kāmya, Sadyojātas; to Vṛṣadhvaja, Muṇḍa, Jaṭin, Brahmacārin; to Tapyamāna, Tapya, Brahmaṇya, and Jaya; to Viśvātman (i.e. the universal soul), Viśvasṛj (i.e. the creator of the universe); and to him who remains by occupying the universe.

145\. My repeated salutations to you—Divya, Prapannārtihara (i.e. who removes the affliction of him who has sought his shelter), to Bhaktānukampin (i.e. who takes compassion on his devotees), O lord, O you who are all-lustre and have the mind’s speed.”

## *Pulastya said*:

146\. O king, Hara, the lord of gods, being thus praised (by Rāma), said (these) words to Rāma who was standing in front of him and was humble with devotion.

147\. Rudra said: “O Rāghava, well-being to you, tell me what is in your mind (i.e. your desire). You are indeed Nārāyaṇa who has descended on the earth being concealed in a human form.

148\. O sinless one, you have performed the mission of gods. Now go (back) to your own place. O you killer of the enemies, you have done your duty.

149\. You have set up the great sacred place called ‘Śetu’, O descendant of Raghu. O king, men will come here and see it (situated) in the ocean.

150-151a. The sins of those who have (committed) great sins perish. The painful sins like brāhmaṇacide perish merely by the sight (of the sacred place). No doubt should be raised about this.

151b-152. O best of Raghus, having installed (the image of) Vāmana on the bank of the Ganges go (to your place). O you tormentor of the enemies, having made eight portions on the earth (i.e. having divided it into eight parts), (please) go to your place—Śveta Dvīpa; O god, my salutation to you.”

153\. Then having saluted (Rudra) Rāma reached the sacred place, viz. Puṣkara. But the Puṣpaka did not go up. It was encompassed.

154\. Raghava remains in the propless sky. There must be (some) reason for this. He told the monkey (i.e. Sugrīva): “See” (why it has stopped).

155-156a. At the order of Rāma Sugrīva, getting down on the earth, saw (there) Brahmā, with gods and Siddhas, with the group of brahmanic sages and with four Vedas.

156b-157. Having seen and come (back) he said to Rāma “The grandsire accompanied by the regents of quarters, and the groups of Vasus, Ādityas and Maruts (is here). That is why the Puṣpaka cannot transgress the grandsire.”

158-159. Then Rāma, having got down from the Puṣpaka, decorated with gold, humbly saluting Brahmā by prostrating the eight parts of the body and touching the earth with five parts of the body, praised Viriñci (i.e. Brahmā), the god of gods.

## *Rāma said*:

160\. I salute (you) the creator of the worlds, adored by the (ten) lords of created beings and gods, (you who are) the protector of the worlds and of beings and the lord of the world.

161\. My salutation to you, O lord of the lord of gods, (to you) who are saluted by gods and demons, (to you) O lord of the past, future and present and (O you) of tawny eyes.

162\. You are a child; you also have an old form; you put on the garment of deer-hide; you are the protector, the god, the lord of the three worlds and the ruler.

163-164. O you Hiraṇyagarbha, Padmagarbha, Vedagarbha (contained in the Vedas), Smṛtiprada (i.e. giver of Smṛtis), you are Mahāsiddha, Mahāpadmin (i.e. having a great lotus), Mahādaṇḍi in (i.e. having a great staff), Mekhalin (i.e. having a girdle); you are Kāla (i.e. Destiny), Kālarūpin (i.e. of the form of Death); Nīlagrīva (i.e. having a dark-blue neck) Vidāmvara (i.e. the wisest one), Vedakartā (i.e. the author of the Vedas), a child, an eternal and immutable one and the lord of beings.

165\. You are Darbhapāṇi (i.e. having darbhas in your hand), Haṃsaketu (i.e. having a swan as banner). You are the doer (of actions), the one who takes away; you are Hara, Hari; you are Jaṭin (i.e. having matted hair); you are Muṇḍin (i.e. shaved); you are Śikhin (i.e. having a tuft of hair); you are Daṇḍin (i.e. having a staff); you are Laguḍin (i.e. having a club); you have great fame.

166\. You are Bhūteśvara (i.e. the lord of beings), Surādhyakṣa (i.e. the chief of the gods). You are Sarvātman (i.e. the soul of all); you are Sarvabhāvana (i.e. the cause of all); you are Sarvaga (i.e. omnipresent), Sarvahārī (i.e. snatching everything), Sraṣṭā (i.e. the creator), Guru (i.e. the lord), Avyaya (i.e. the immutable).

167-168. You are the god holding the pitcher, the spoon, the wooden ladle etc. You are Havanīya (i.e. to which oblations are offered), you are Oṃkāra; you ure Jyeṣṭhasāmaga (i.e. chanter of the Jyeṣṭhasaman). You are Mṛtyu (i.e. death), Amṛta (i.e. immortal), Pāriyātra (i.e. an inhabitant of the Pāriyātra[^5] mountain), Suvrata (i.e. having good vows). You are Brahmacārin (i.e. a celebate), Vratadhara (i.e. possessing a vow), Guhāvāsin (i.e. living in the cave of the heart), Supaṅkaja (i.e. born of a good lotus).

[^5]:  Pāriyātra—the mountain referred to here is one of the seven principal mountains. See note on 34.395.

169\. You are Amara (i.e. immortal), Darśanīya (i.e. handsome) and you resemble the young sun. You are resorted to by your two wives (viz. Sāvitrī and Gāyatrī) on your right and left sides.

170\. You are a Bhikṣu (i.e. a mendicant), are of the form of a bhikṣu; you are Trijaṭin (i.e. Śiva); you have obtained what you decided (to have); you are the cause of mental functions; you are Kāma (i.e. Desire); you are Madhu (i.e. the Spring season); also you are the cause of the Spring season.

171\. You are a Vānaprastha (i.e. an anchorite); you stay in a forest, in a hermitage, and are worshipped as such. You are the supporter and the cause of the world; and are the eternal, stable Puruṣa.

172\. You are Dharmādhyakṣa (i.e. chief of moral virtue), Virūpākṣa (i.e. Śiva), Tridharma (i.e. the three types of Duty) Bhūtabhāvana (i.e. the cause of beings); you are the three Vedas; you are multiformed; your lustre is like that of a myriad suns.

173\. You are especially Mohaka and Vandhaka among the demons. You are the god of gods, Padmāṅka (i.e. characterised by a lotus), Trinetra (i.e. Śiva), and Abjaja (i.e. lotus-born).

174a. You are Hariśmaśru (i.e. having tawny beard), an archer; you are fearful and have piety as your valour.

174b-175a. The grandsire, Brahmā, the best among those who know Vedas, who was thus praised by Rāma, who was humble, held his hand, and said:

175b-1 76a. “You are Viṣṇu who has descended on the earth in a human form. O you great lord, you have done all the mission of the gods.

176b-177a. Installing (the image of) god Vāmana on the right bank, go to the city of Ayodhyā and (finally) to heaven.”

177b-178a. Rama, (thus) dismissed by Brahmā, saluted the grandsire, got into the Puṣpaka aeroplane, and went to the sweet city (of Mathurā).

178b-1 79a. Seeing (there) Śatrughna, the killer of enemies, and (seeing) his sons with him, the great Rāma, with Bharata and the lord of monkeys (i.e. Sugrīva), was pleased.

179b-180a. Śatrughna went to his two brothers resembling Indra and Upendra. He saluted them by touching the earth with five parts[^6] of the body.

[^6]:  Pañcāṅga—The five limbs which must touch the ground are: (1) hands, (2) knees, (3) head, (4) chest. and (5) eyes.

180b-182a. Rāma quickly raised his brother and put him on his lap. Then Bharata sat down and then Sugrīva. He quickly made a respectful offering to Rāma and reported to him about the kingdom consisting of eight parts.

182b-183a. Having heard that Rāma had come, all the people of Mathurā, the castes mostly consisting of brāhmaṇas came (there) to see him.

183b-184a. Having talked with the subjects and the interpreters of the Vedas[^7], with the Brāhmaṇas, Rāma, having remained there for five days decided to leave.

[^7]:  Naigama—interpreter of the Vedas or sacred texts.

184b-185a. Then Śatrughna presented Rāma with horses, elephants and refined and unrefined gold.

185b-186a. Then Rāma, being pleased, said: “O son, all this I have given you. Consecrate your two sons as the kings of the residents of Mathurā.”

186b-187. Saying so Rāma then reached Ayodhyā on Sunday afternoon. Finding a. lucky (time) he installed (the image of) Vāmana on the bank of the Ganges and said to the brāhmaṇas and to the future kings:

188-190a. “I have prepared this Dharma-setu (‘bridge of piety’) which enhances welfare. At the proper time you have to observe (the vow with reference to it). You have never to drop (the vow). O kings, I have made this appeal with my hands spread out. When I have thus requested you, do what would lead to welfare. All of you should always carefully perform the daily worship.”

190b-191. Having given to them villages and wealth brought from Laṅkā, and having sent Sugrīva, the lord of monkeys (back) to Kiṣkindhā, Rāma came to Ayodhyā and then said to Puṣpaka:

192\. “Do not come (here) again. Remain where Kubera is (i.e. stay with Kubera)”. Then Rāma who had done (all) his duties, did not see anything (left) to be done.

## *Pulastya said*:

193-194. O Bhīṣma, I have thus told you about the origin of Vāmana in course of the story of Rāma. What more do you want to hear? O King, I shall tell you all that about which you have a curiosity. O prince, I shall tell you everything which you desire (to know).









