+++
title = "45 The Manifesṭation of Narasiṃha"

+++
 

## *Bhīṣma said*:

1\. Now I desire to hear about the killing of Hiraṇyakaśipu, about the greatness of Narasiṃha and about the destruction that he brought about.

## *Pulastya said*:

2-4. O king, formerly, in the Kṛta age, Hiraṇyakaśipu, the lord of demons, practised a very great (i.e. severe) penance. He, surrounded by (i.e. observing) tranquility, restraint and celibacy and having taken up the vow of bath and silence lived in water for ten thousand and ten hundred years. Brahmā was pleased with him as a result of his penance and restraint.

5-8. Then, (seated) in a bright aeroplane, whose colour (i.e. brilliance) was like the sun, and to which swans were yoked, the self-born lord himself came there, with Ādityas, Vasus, Sādhyas, Maruts, (other) deities, Rudras accompanied by Viśvas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, serpents, also with quarters, intermediate quarters, rivers and oceans, also with constellations, instants, beings moving in the sky, great planets, gods, brahmanic sages, Siddhas, also the seven sages, and also with meritorious royal sages, and hosts of Gandharvas and celestial nymphs.

9-10. Brahmā, the affluent lord of the mobile and the immobile, the best among those who knew Brahman (i.e. the supreme spirit), surrounded by the residents of heaven, said (these) words to the demon (Hiraṇyakaśipu): “O you of a good vow, I am pleased with this penance of yours, (my) devotee. Well-being to you; ask for a boon; obtain what you desire.”

## *Hiraṇyakaśipu said*:

11\. O best of gods, no gods, no demons, no Gandharvas, no Yakṣas, no serpents, no Rākṣasas, no men, no goblins should kill me.

12\. O grandsire, sages or men should not curse me with curses. If the lord is pleased, this is the boon chosen by me.

13\. I should not be killed with a weapon, or a missile, with a mountain (or a huge rock), or a tree, with a dry or a wet object, or by any other object.

14-15. Let me be the Sun, the Moon, Vāyu, Agni, Water, the Sky, the constellations and the ten quarters. I am wrath; I am desire, I am Varuṇa, Indra and Yama. I am Kubera, the lord of wealth, and the king of Yakṣas and Kinnaras.

## *Brahmā said*:

16\. O child, I have granted you this divine, wonderful boon, giving (i.e. satisfying) all desires. O child, you will obtain (whatever you want).

17-18. Saying so, the lord went to his residence, Vairāja (i.e. of Brahmā), attended upon by hosts of brahmanic sages. Then gods, Gandharvas with sages, the Cāraṇas (i.e. bards), having heard about the grant of the boon (to Hiraṇyakaśipu) approached the grandsire.

## *The gods said*:

19-20. O lord, due to your having granted him a boon, the demon will kill us. So be pleased, and think as to how he also could be killed. You, the lord, are the first creator of all beings. You are the author of the offerings meant for gods and manes. Your nature is unmanifest; you are the greatest (god).

21\. Having heard those words beneficial to all the worlds, the creator consoled them with the very cold water of his words:

22\. “O gods, he must get the fruit of his penance. Lord Viṣṇu will kill him at the end of his penance.”

23\. Hearing these words from the mouth of the Lotus-born one, all the gods gladly went to their own divine abodes.

24\. That demon Hiraṇyakaśipu, who had become proud due to the grant of the boon, harassed all beings as soon as he got the boon.

25\. The demon offended holy sages observing vows and following the path of truth with self-restraint in hermitages.

26\. The great demon having defeated the gods living in the three worlds, and having brought under his control the three worlds, lived in heaven.

27\. When he was haughty due to (the grant of) the boon, and when he was (thus) urged by Death, he made the demons the recipients of portions at sacrifices and deprived gods of these portions.

28-29. Daityas, Sādhyas, also all Vasus, Rudras, hosts of gods, Yakṣas, deities, brāhmaṇas and great sages approached, for shelter, Viṣṇu, the ancient Vāsudeva, of great might, the god of gods, full of (i.e. of the nature of) sacrifice.

## *Gods said*:

30-31. O glorious Nārāyaṇa, (we) the gods have sought your refuge. Protect (us), kill Hiraṇyakaśipu, the lord of demons, O lord. You are our great preceptor. You are our highest god; you are the best god among Brahnā and others.

## *Viṣṇu said*:

32\. O gods, give up your fear; I shall grant you fearlessness (i.e. I shall remove the cause of your fear). And, O gods, go to heaven, do not tarry.

33\. I shall kill this lord of demons, who has become haughty because of the grant of a boon (to him by Brahmā) and who could not be killed by great gods.

34-35a. Saying so, the immutable lord Viṣṇu, Hari, the lord and the protector of the universe, who looked like the sun due to his brilliance and was as it were another moon due to his charm, went to the place of Hiraṇyakaśipu.

35b-41. Having made his body having half the portion of human body and half of a lion’s body, and holding (one) hand with another, he, with the Narasiṃha form, saw Hiraṇya-kasipu’s assembly, which was huge, divine, charming and pleasing to the mind, which was endowed with all desires (i.e.,desired objects), bright, which was a hundred yojanas in lengh, fifty yojanas in breadth, which was aerial, which moved according to the desire (of the inmates), which was five yojanas in height, which was free from old age, grief and forbearance, which did not shake, which was auspicious and pleasant, which had water inside and which was laid by Viśvakarman, which was endowed with trees of a divine colour giving flowers and fruits, and with dark-blue, white, dark white, reddish, bright thickets having red sprouts floating (in the atmosphere) like a mass of white clouds.

42-45. It was naturally brilliant, and was agreeable due to divine fragrance. Those who reached it, did not have hunger, thirst or fatigue. It was decorated with bright pictures of many kinds. Its brightness surpassed that of the sun, the moon or the fire, and it was self-shining. Illuminating (other objects) that very brilliant assembly shone in the heaven. All men, being pleased, shone in it. In it there was excellent, tasty and abundant food to eat.

46\. There werewreaths of auspicious fragrance; there were trees always giving fruit. The water there was cold in the hot season and warm in the cold season.

47\. The lord saw there the Kalpa trees, with their tops having flowers, having large branches, and shoots and sprouts, and covered with the spreading out creepers.

48\. The flowers were fragrant, and the fruits were juicy. The lord also saw there the lakes—the sacred places—(having) cold and hot (water).

49-51. They had (by them) fragrant lotuses, white lotuses, red lotuses, blue lotuses, white lotuses, water-lilies, and other very likeable flowers full of many wonders; they looked like spotless crystals with birds like Kāraṇḍava, Cakravāka, cranes and ospreys and with birds of white wings.

52-54. They had the cooings of many swans and the notes of cranes. The lord was happy to see fragrant creepers having flowers and blossoms, and khadira, vetasa and arjuna trees. In the assembly there were trees like the mango, nimba, nāga, kadamba, bakula, dhava, priyaṅgu, pāṭala, śālmali, haridrava, śāla, tāla, tamāla[^1] and beautiful campaka.

[^1]:  The Tamāla tree is mentioned again in 62 below.

55-60. Also other blossoming trees shone in the assembly. There were trees like cardamom, arjuna, kaṅkola, levalī, karṇapūraka, madhuka, kovidāra tall like many tālas, añjana, aśoka, parṇāsa, many citraka trees, varuṇa, capalāśa, panasa with sandal trees; nīla nimba, nīpa, aśvattha and tinduka, pārijāta and jasmine (creepers) and pine trees[^3], aṭarūṣa, groups of palm trees, cardamom and camphor trees, mandāra, kurabaka[^4], punnāga and kuṭaja, also red and blue kurabaka with sandal, big kiṃśukas and pomegranate trees, black sandal trees, dukūla, hiṅgu, and sandal trees.

[^3]:  The Kurabaka tree is mentioned twice.

[^4]:  Nalba is a measure of distance equal to 400 cubits or hastas.

61-62. Date trees, coconut trees, haritaka, madhūka, saptaparṇa, bilva, yava, śarāvata, and asana, tamāla, covered with many clusters of trees, creepers of various forms, with flowers and leaves (were there).

63-64. These and other wild trees with many flowers and fruits shone all round. Partridges, peacocks, intoxicated cuckoos and sārikā birds flew down on the great trees full of flowers and having flowers on their tops.

65\. The delighted small and big birds—red, yellow, and tawny in colour—perching on the tops of trees, looked at one another.

66-67. In that assembly demon Hiraṇyakaśipu, the lord of demons, with bright bracelets, was seated on a variegated, divine seat, of the measure of four hundred cubits[^5], resembling the sun and covered over with a divine coverlet.

[^5]:  Viśvedevāḥ—Name of a particular group of deities ten in number and supposed to be sons of Viśva; their names are: Vasu, Satya, Kratu, Dakṣa, Kāla, Kāma, Dhṛti, Kuru, Purūravas and Mādrava.

68-71. Great demons at that time waited upon Hiraṇyakaśipu. Best Gandharvas sang songs having a divine rhythm. Viśvācī, Sahajanyā, honoured Pramlocā, Divyā, Saurabheyī, Samīci, Puñjikasthalā, Miśrakeśī, Rambhā, Citrabhā, Śrutivibhramā, Cārunetrā, Ghṛtācī, Urvaśī, thousands like these and other celestial nymphs, skilled in dancing and music, waited upon the lord i.e. king Hiraṇyakaśipu.

72-75. All the sons of Diti, who had obtained boons, waited upon Hiraṇyakaśipu. They were: Bali, Virocana, Naraka, the son of Pṛthivī, Prahlāda, Vipraciti, and the great demon Gaviṣṭha, Surahantā, Duḥkhakartā, Sumanas and also Sumati, Ghaṭodara, Mahāpārśva, Krathana and Pithara, Viśvarūpa, Svarūpa, Viśvakāya, Mahābala, Daśagrīva, Vālin, and the great demon Meghavāsas, Ghaṭābha, Viṭarūpa, Jvalana and Aindratāpana.

76-78a. All the groups of brave demons, who had put on bright ear-rings, who wore wreaths and armours, all of whom had practised vows, all of whom had obtained boons, all who had ordained death (i.e. were ready to die)—these and others, with divine retinues waited upon the magnanimous Hiraṇyakaśipu.

78b-79. (They had) aeroplanes of various shapes, as it were blazing with fires. All the sons of Diti, with bodies of lordly demons, with ornaments round their arms, with their bodies decorated, waited upon him on all sides.

80\. Affluence like that of the lord of demons was never heard of or seen before as belonging to any other individual in the three worlds.

81-82. The lord (i.e. Narasiṃha) saw that Diti’s son, whose body was decorated with golden bracelets and necklaces, who was bright like the brilliance of the sun’s rays, and who was being waited upon by hundreds of thousands (of demons).

83-84. Then seeing the magnanimous one, concealed in the body of Narasiṃha like fire covered with ashes, coming like the wheel of time, Hiraṇyakaśipu’s brave son, Prahlāda by name saw the god coming there in the form of Narasiṃha.

85\. Seeing him taking up that extraordinary form shining like a golden mountain, all the demons were amazed; so also was that Hiraṇyakaśipu.

## *Prahlāda said*:

86\. O great king, O you of great arms, O you first-born among the demons, I have never heard of or seen this body of Narasiṃha (before).

87\. Of what (i.e. taking which) form has this great unmanifest divine one come? My mind tells that this terrific one is the destroyer of the demons.

88-91. Gods, oceans, and rivers reside in his body. Himālaya, Pāriyātra and other principal mountains (reside in his body). The Moon with constellations, the Sun with rays, Kubera, Varuṇa, Yama, Indra the lord of Śacī, the Maruts, gods and Gandharvas, sages having penance as their treasure (reside in his body). Serpents, Yakṣas, demons of terrific valour, Brahmā, (other) gods, and the lord of beings (i.e. Śiva) and also all the immobile and mobile (objects) residing on his forehead, are moving.

92-93. With us you are surrounded by the hosts of demons. O king, this your assembly crowded with hundreds of splendid rooms, also all the three worlds, the eternal dharma of the worlds, and this entire world are seen in Narasiṃha.

94-95. Here (i.e. in Narasiṃha’s body are seen) the creator, the great-souled Manu, planets and (their) conjunctions, the earth and the sky, the time of portents, and Dhṛti (courage), Mati (intellect), Rati (pleasure), Satya (truth), Tapas (penance) and Dama (restraint), Sanatkumāra of great prowess, Viśvedeva[^6], and all sages, Krodha (anger), Kāma (desire), Harṣa (joy), Darpa (pride), Moha (delusion) and all the dead ancestors.

[^6]:  Śataghnī—A kind of weapon used as a missile, supposed by some to be a sort of rocket, but described by others as a huge stone studded with iron spikes and four talas in length.

96\. Having heard the words of Prahlāda, lord Hiraṇyakaśipu, the head of the hosts of attendants, said to all the groups of his attendants:

97\. “Seize this lordly lion, who has taken up an extraordinary body; if you have any doubt, kill this wild animal.”

98\. All those followers of the demon, vigorously surrounding the lordly lion of terrible valour, joyfully frightened him.

99\. With his mouth widely opened like that of Yama, the very powerful Narasiṃha roared and destroyed that divine assembly.

100\. When the assembly was being destroyed Hiraṇyakaśipu himself, with his eyes full of anger, threw missiles at the lion:

101-108. The very terrible missile of all missiles called ‘Daṇḍa’, the fierce deadly disc, another missile called Viṣṇu-cakra, the great missile of the grandsire—the great and fearful missile fashioned in the three worlds, the wonderful Aśani missile, the two Aśani missiles—dry and wet, terrible and fearful spear, skeleton (used as a missile), pestle, the missile called ‘Brahmaśiras’, the missile known as ‘Brahmāstra’, the missile called ‘Nārāyaṇāstra’ (i.e. of Nārāyaṇa), ‘Aindrāstra’ (of Indra), ‘Āgneyāstra’ (i.e. of Agni) and ‘Śaisirāstra’ (i.e. of the winter, i.e. causing cold), ‘Vāyavyāstra’ (i.e. of Vāyu), ‘Mathana’ (i.e. destructive), ‘Kapāla’ (skull) that was (always) obedient, a powerful missile never repulsed, a missile named ‘Krauñca’, ‘Mohana’ (deluding), ‘Śoṣaṇa’ (drying up), ‘Santapana’ (tormenting) and ‘Vilapana’ (causing to weep), ‘Kampana’ (causing to tremble), ‘Śāntana’ (making dull), the great missile that would obstruct (the movements), fatal mallet, the very powerful tormenting missile that could not be stumbled, the destructive, deluding and excellent missile having (the power of causing) illusion, the missile called ‘Gandharvāstra’ dear to him, ‘Nandaka’, the gem of a sword, the best missile called ‘Varuṇāstra’ causing sleep and destruction, the missile called ‘Pāśupata’, the scope of which was never resisted.

109\. Hiraṇyakaśipu discharged these divine weapons at Narasiṃha, as one would throw an oblation into fire.

110\. The best of the demons covered the lion (i.e. Narasiṃha) with missiles as the sun covers the Himālaya mountain with his rays in the summer.

111-113. That ocean of the army of the demons, rising with the fire of anger, inundated everything with darts and barbed missiles, swords, maces, and pestles, with missiles like vajra and aśani, with mallets and snares, stones, mortars and rocks, with blazing śataghnīs{GL_NOTE::}, and very fearful staffs, as the ocean did the Maināka mountain.

114-115. Those demons, who had held nooses in their hands, who were comparable to Indra, whose velocity was like that of the thunderbolt, who had raised their hands and had stood up everywhere, whose bodies were full of (i.e. adorned with) golden strings, whose mouth-cavities were full of (i.e. having) very sharp fangs, stood there like young ones of serpents with their heads (raised). They, with throbbing lustre, horned bodies, and silken garments, appeared like swans.

116-117a. The demon produced illusory fire, urged by wind. Indra, of thousand eyes, and very lustrous, quenched the fire with a great (i.e. heavy) shower of water from (i.e. discharged through) clouds.

117b-118a. When that illusion was repulsed (by Indra) in the battle, the demon produced sharp (i.e. pitchy) darkness, looking terrible, on all sides.

ll8b-120a. When the world was screened with darkness, and when the demons had taken the weapons, he, surrounded by his own lustre, (looked) like the sun, that had risen. In the battle the demons saw three frowns on his eye-brows (that were knit) as Gaṅgā flowing in three directions (appears) on the forehead (of Śiva).

120b-12la. Then when all the illusions were repulsed, the demons—the sons of Diti—being dejected, sought the refuge of Hiraṇyakaśipu.

12lb-122a. Then as it were burning with lustre he blazed with anger. When the lord of the demons was angry (like that), the world became full of darkness.

122b-124a. The seven agitated Maruts—Āvaha, Pravaha, the wind Vivaha, Paravaha, Saṃvaha, the very mighty Udvaha and the majestic Parivaha—moved in the sky and (thus) indicated the fear of imminent calamity.

124b-125a. Those planets which appear at the time of the end (i.e. destruction) of the world, being delighted moved in the sky as they liked.

125b-126a. O you, who curb your enemy, the Moon moved in the sky with planets and constellations even though it was not the time of their conjunction.

126b-127. In the sky the Sun became lustreless. A black headless trunk at that time was seen in the sky. The Sun generated blackness (i.e. darkness) and the fire produced smokiness.

128\. The lord, being in the sky was constantly surrounded. Seven Suns, resembling smoke came up in the sky.

129\. The planets remained on the top of the Moon in the sky. The planets Venus and Jupiter remained to the left and right (sides of the Moon).

130-132. Saturn with his red form, appeared like Mars. The fearful planets moving in the sky, (as it were) uniting at the time of the end of a yuga, together slowly mounted the tops. The Moon, the dispeller of darkness, along with (i.e. accompanied by) planets and constellations did not greet Rohiṇī for the destruction of (i.e. because he wanted to destroy) the mobile and the immobile. The Moon, seized by Rāhu, was struck by meteors.

133\. The blazing meteors moved on the Moon as they liked. The god, the lord of gods also showered blood.

134\. From the sky, a meteor of the form of lightning fell down, with a great sound. All trees had flowers and fruits out of the season.

135\. All the creepers said to be the destroyers of the demons bore fruit. Fruit grew on fruit and a flower on another flower.

136-138. All the figures of gods, foreboding great fear, appeared and disappeared, laughed and wept, cried gravely, appeared smoky and blazed. When that fight among the animals was imminent, domesticated beasts and birds mixed with the wild ones cried ferociously; and rivers, with their water (rendered) turbid, flowed in the opposite direction.

139-141a. Quarters, full of particles of blood, did not shine. The trees fit to be worshipped, were not at all worshipped; they were struck, broken and bent by the velocity of the wind. And also the shadows of people did not change though the Sun, at the time of the end of the worlds, went to the west.

141b-142. At that time, for the destruction of demons and the victory of gods, wine entered the store-room and the armoury situated on the upper chamber (of the mansion) of Hiraṇyakaśipu.

143-144a. Various fearful portents indicating terrible things were seen. These and others of terrible nature, foreboding a fight causing the destruction of the lord of demons, appeared there.

144b-145. When the earth was shaken by the magnanimous lord of the demons, mountains and groups of serpents of unlimited prowess, and discharging fire from their mouths full of flames of poison, fell down.

146-148a. Serpents, having four, five or seven hoods, Vāsuki, Takṣaka, Karkoṭaka, Dhanañjaya, Elāmukha, Kāliya and the powerful Mahāpadma, Śuddhāṅga with a thousand hoods and the lord Hematāladhvaja, Śeṣa, the great serpent Ananta (ordinarily) unshakeable, trembled.

148b-149a. The seven watery fissures of the earth (i.e. the seven oceans) trembled on all sides, being shaken by the anger of the lord of demons.

149b-151a. The beings moving in Pātāla, and having lustre of various kinds, (though ordinarily) unshakeable, trembled, when Pātāla suddenly got disturbed. Then the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu, angry and biting his lips, laid his hand on the earth like the ancient Boar.

151b-155a. The rivers Gaṅgā or Bhāgīrathī, Kauśikī, Sarayū, Yamunā, Kāverī, Kṛṣṇaveṇī, Tuṅgabhadrā flowing speedily, the river Godāvarī, Carmaṇvatī, Sindhu the lord of big and (small) rivers, confluence (of rivers) with its water resembling rubies, Narmadā of a pious flow, the river Vetravatī, Gomatī crowded with herds of cattle, Pūrvā Sarasvatī, Mahākālamahī, and Tamasā carrying flowers were agitated.

155b-158a. The Jambūdvīpa, possessed ofjewels and adorned by all jewels, Suvarṇapuṭaka adorned with golden mines, the great river Lauhitya, the mountain adorned with gold, the city of Kośakāras (those who make scubbards), Kaśa, the mine of silver, the country of Magadha with big towns, the fearful Puṇḍra (country), (the countries viz.) Srughna, Malla, Videha, Mālava, Kāśī and Kosala were disturbed.

158b-159a. The abode of Vainateya (i.e. Garuḍa), which resembled the shape of the peak of Kailāsa and which had been fashioned by Viśvakarman, was shaken by the lord of the demons.

159b-164. The great ocean called Lauhitya which had jewelled water and which was very fierce, the great mountain Udaya which was a hundred Yojanas in height, had golden tracts on it, which was beautiful and was resorted to by the rows of clouds, which was looking bright with golden trees like the sun, with blossomed trees of Sāla, Tāla, Tamāla and Karṇīkāra, the Ayomukha mountain, well-known and beautified all round with minerals, the auspicious Malaya mountain, fragrant due to the Tamāla-thickets, the Surāṣṭras, the Bālhīkas, the Śūdras, the Ābhīras, the Bhojas, the Pāṇḍyas, the Vaṅgas, the Kaliṅgas, the Tāmraliptakas, the Pauṇḍras, Śubhras, Vāmacūḍas, Keralas, and gods and the hosts of the celestial nymphs were disturbed by that demon.

165-166. The demon shook Agastya’s residence, which was in olden days put up by Agastya, which was charming and was crowded with the hosts of Siddhas and Cāraṇas, which had various kinds of beautiful birds, and which had trees having flowers, which was resorted to by the hosts of nymphs on account of its golden turrets.

167\. The lustrous and lovely Puṣpitaka mountain, the resting place of the moon and the sun, rose after cutting off the ocean.

168\. It shone, as it were touching the sky with its great peaks, resembling the moon and the sun and covered with the water of the ocean. (All these were disturbed by the demon.)

169\. The mountain Vidyutvān, beautiful and a hundred yojanas long, on which best mountain, flashes[?] of lighting fell (was agitated by the demon).

170-171. The beautiful mountain Ṛṣabha occupied by ṛṣabhas (bulls), the lustrous Kuñjara mountain, the auspicious-residence of Agastya, the inacessible city of serpents viz. Mālatī, known to be pure, the (city) Bhogavatī was shaken by the lord of demons.

172-174. The mountain Mahāsena, the mountain Pāriyātra, the great mountain Cakravān, and the Vārāha mountain, the auspicious, golden city Prāgjyotiṣa, where the wicked demon Naraka resided, the best mountain Megha, (giving out) deep sounds like clouds, and, O King, sixty thousand mountains (were shaken by the demon).

175\. The great mountain Meru, appearing like the young (morning) sun, whose caves were always resorted to by Yakṣas, Rākṣasas and Gandharvas (was disturbed by the demon).

176\. The Mahāsena mountain, containing gold, the mountain Meghasakha (were shaken by the demon). The best of mountains viz. Kailāsa was also shaken by the lord of demons.

177\. He also agitated the Mānasa lake of (i.e. resorted to by) the anchorites, which was covered with golden lotuses and which was crowded with swans and ducks.

178-181. The greatest mountain Triśṛṅga (i.e. Trikūṭa), the excellent river Kumārī, even the Mandara mountain covered with the spray of cold water, the mountain Uśīrabīja, Bhadraprastha—the lord of mountains, the mountain Prajāpati, the mountain Puṣkara, Devābha mountain and Vālukāgiri, Krauñca mountain of the seven sages and the mountain Dhūmravarṇa—these and other mountain regions and countries, all rivers along with oceans were shaken by the demon.

182-184. Kapila, the son of the earth, and Vyāghravān were shaken by him; the sons of Niśā, moving in the sky, the residents of Pātāla, another terrible attendant named Megha and having a goad as his weapon, going up and having a fearful speed—all these were shaken (by the demon).

185-186a. Diti’s son, gods’ enemy, haughy Hiraṇyakaśipu, with a mace and a spike in his hand, making a deep sound like a cloud, and speedy like Indra, ran to Nṛsiṃha. Then he was torn asunder with sharp, great nails by the lion (i.e. Nṛsiṃha) with (the utterance of) Om, and was killed in battle.

186b-188a. As a result of the destruction of Diti’s son, the earth, the time, the moon, the sky, the planets including the Sun, all the quarters, rivers, mountains, great oceans became composed. Then the gods and the sages—the treasures of penance—being delighted, praised the ancient, first god, with divine names:

188b-189a. “O god, gods and men knowing the higher and lower, will worship this Narasiṃha form of you.”

## *Brahmā said*:

189b-193a. You are Brahmā, Rudra, and Indra, O best of gods. You are the author, the destroyer and the eternal source of the worlds. They call you the highest attainment, the highest being, the greatest secret and the best oblation. They call you the most ancient one; they call you the greatest truth, the greatest penance, the highest pure (form), the best path, the greatest sacrifice, the best oblation, the first, the greatest and the ancient one. They call you the best body, the highest Brahman, the highest yoga and the best speech. They call you the greatest secret, the best recourse, the first, the greatest and the ancient one.

193b-197. Speaking thus, the lord, the grands ire of all the worlds, having praised god Nārāyaṇa went to the Brahma-world. Then the lord Hari (i.e. Nārāyaṇa) went to the northern shore of the milky ocean, when the musical instruments were sounding and the celestial damsels were dancing. Then the very brilliant lord, placed the Narasiṃha form (there), took up his ancient form and he, having Garuḍa as his banner, and his nature unmanifested, left (the place) in a bright vehicle having eight wheels, (and) went to his own abode.













[^2]:  Bhadradāru is a kind of pine.