+++
title = "63 A Hymn to Gaṇapati"

+++
 

## *Pulastya said*:

1-3. O Bhīṣma, in the meanwhile, Sañjaya, a great sage and a disciple of Vyāsa, having saluted his preceptor asked him formerly: “(Please) tell (me) the means of worshipping gods and the well-defined order in which they should be worshipped. Which god is most adorable in the beginning? Who should be worshipped in between (the first and the best)? Who should be worshipped last in everyday worship? Whose power is what (i.e. what is the power of each one)? O brāhmaṇa, worshipping whom, what fruit would a man obtain?”

## *Vyāsa said*:

4\. For removing obstacles of (one’s way to) the next world, a man should first worship Gaṇeśa in this world. He obtains the status of Vināyaka, since he is the son of Gaurī (i.e. Pārvatī).

5\. Formerly Pārvatī gave birth to these two sons from Śiva, viz. Skanda and Gaṇapati. The two gods sustain all the worlds, and are brave.

6-7. Seeing the two, the daughter of the (Himālaya) Mountain (i.e. Pārvatī) said (to them): “O sons, this modaka is given by gods, who were full of joy. It is known as Mahābuddhi (highly intelligent), and is fashioned with nectar. I shall tell about its merit; be attentive and listen.

8-9. Merely by smelling it, a man would certainly obtain immortality. He knows the meaning and essence of all sacred books; he becomes conversant with the use of weapons and missiles; he becomes adept in all sciences; he becomes a writer, a painter; the very intelligent one knows the essence of the knowledge of the Supreme Spirit and worldly knowledge; he becomes ominscient; there is no doubt about this.

10\. O sons, being superior to Virtue, he would obtain a hundred accomplishments. This is approved by your father also (to whom) I am handing (you) over.”

11-13. The very wise Skanda, hearing these words from his mother's mouth, instantly visited all the sacred places situated on the earth, after having mounted his peacock; the very intelligent Lambodara (i.e. Gaṇeśa), (however), having bathed in a moment, and after having gone round his parents keeping them to his right, and being delighted, stood before his parents themselves. Like that Skanda also stood before them, saying (to Pārvatī): “Give it (i.e. the modaka) to me.”

14-15. Looking at them, Pārvatī, being amazed, then said: “A man by means of bathing at all sacred places, saluting all gods, performing all (kinds of) sacrifices, (observing) vows, (reciting) sacred hymns, by means of deep and abstract meditation and other restraints, does not get even one-sixteenth of the religious merit of him who has worshipped his parents.

16\. Therefore he also is hundred times better than a hundred sons. Therefore, I give Gaṇeśa this modaka made by gods.

17\. For this reason only, he will receive worship first in sacrifices, (in recital) of Vedas and sacred texts and hymns of praise, and also in everyday worships (of deities).”

18-19. Along with Pārvatī, Śiva also granted him a great boon: “May the gods be pleased with his worship at the commencement (of a rite etc.). Let the penance (in honour) of all gods and manes everywhere be (commenced) when the lord of Gaṇas (i.e. Gaṇeśa) is worshipped first.”

20\. Therefore, a brāhmaṇa should (first) worship Gaṇeśa in all sacrifices; they (i.e. the sacrifices then) have crores and crores (times) religious merit—these are the words of the god (i.e. Śiva) and the goddess (i.e. Pārvatī).

21\. Then, the god and the goddess (i.e. Śiva and Pārvatī) gladly gave all their excellence and merit (to Gaṇeśa) and made him the chief of the Gaṇas before all the gods.

22\. Therefore by worshipping Gaṇeśa in all big sacrifices, (recital of) hymns of praise and everyday worship, a man would get prosperity.

23\. Knowing thus, all the gods worshipped him with a desire to obtain the desired (object) and certainly for (going to) heaven and (obtaining) salvation.

24\. (A man would be free from all sins) if he, eating at night (only), would, on the fourth day (of every fortnight), worship god Gaṇeśa’s idol or symbol or picture.

25-26. (He should recite the following hymn:) “O Lord of Gaṇas, O you, who put an end to all difficulties, O you, who give delight to Umā, O you, wise one, my salutation to you. Protect me from the ocean of the mundane existence. O lord, O you who delight Śiva, O you who grant (the power to practise) deep and abstract meditation, you the lord of (i.e. who overcome) obstacles, my salutation to you. Always be pleased with me.”

27\. A man, who, having fasted, would joyfully worship Gaṇeśa, becomes free from all sins, and is honoured in heaven.

28\. I shall tell you the hymn containing his twelve names (in honour) of him. The mantra is: “Om, salutation to Gaṇapati.”

29-31. He, who, after getting up in the morning recites these twelve names of him, viz. Gaṇapati, Vighnarāja, Lambatuṇḍa, Gajānana, Dvaimatura, Heramba, Ekadanta, Gaṇādhipa, Vināyaka, Cārukarṇa, Paśupāla (and) Bhavātmaja”, would have the entire universe under his control and would never meet with any difficulty. Great evil spirits become calm; he is not troubled by diseases; being free from all sins, he eternally obtains (i.e. lives in) heaven.


