+++
title = "64 Another Hymn to Gaṇapati"

+++
 

## *Vyāsa said*:

1\. I shall again tell you another hymn of praise in honour of Gaṇeśa, which gives success in all undertakings; which is sacred, and which gives every desired fruit:

2-3. “I salute the chief of the Gaṇas, who has one tusk, whose body is big, who resembles heated gold, who has a large belly, and large eyes, who has put on the muñja (girdle), and the skin of the black antelope, and has the sacred thread of serpents, who has, on his head, the digit of the young moon.

4-5a. I salute the lord of the Gaṇas. I salute the chief of the Gaṇas, who removes and is (himself) free from all obstacles, who, mounting upon the best mouse, desired to fight in the great war between the gods and the demons, and who possesses mighty arms.

5b-6a. I salute the chief of the Gaṇas, who delights the heart of Pārvatī, who is surrounded by Mātṛkās, to whom devotion is dear, and who is furious with passion.

6b-7a. I salute the chief of the Gaṇas, whose body looks lovely on account of variegated jewels, who has ornaments in the form of bright garlands; (I salute) the god who possesses any form that he likes.

7b-8a. I salute the chief of the Gaṇas, who has an elephant’s face, who is the best among gods, and who is adorned with charming ears. I salute the lord of Gaṇas, who holds a noose and a goad.

8b-9a. I salute the chief of the Gaṇas, who is always being praised by Yakṣas, Kinnaras, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Vidyādharas, and who has a large body.”

9b-10a. A man, who would devoutly recite this auspicious hymn of eight verses in praise of Gaṇeśa, obtains all (kinds of) prosperity, and is honoured in Rudra’s heaven.

10b-11. (Such) a man does not suffer loss of possession in seven births. A man who recites this daily becomes a great king. By reciting and listening to this greatly meritorious hymn of praise to Gaṇeśa, he brings the three worlds under his control.


