+++
title = "01"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 1: *** ***Sri Soota uvaacha - *** ***Paraasharam munivaram kruta pourvaanhika kriyam |*** ***Maitrayah pari papraccha pranipatya abhivaadhya cha ||*** It is said that *Paraasharar* was only 30 years old, whereas Maitreya was 80 years old. Maitreya was also a *jnyaani*; he requested Paraasharar who had completed his *aanhika kriyaas*, and *pranipatya, abhivaadya*. This shows how one should approach an *aachaarya*. 



 [[10]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary*** ***Atha bhagavaan paraasharah sri maitreyaaya loka hitaartham sri   
vishnu puraanam praneshyan pranipaataadibhih upasannaaya sat   
shishyaaya sadaachaaravataa tat prushtena gurunaa sva dharma   
anusthaana aviruddhe manah prasaadakara samaye puraanam   
vyaakhyeyam iti shaastra darshanaat puraana prastaavakam tat   
prashnam nibadhnaati - paraasharam iti shlokena |*** In the pretext of teaching Sri Maitreya, Sri Paraashara has done this for *loka **hitaartha*, for everyone's good. When a *shishya* approaches an *aachaarya* in a proper way, the *aachaarya* has to teach, this is the *vidhi*. When should one approach an *aachaarya *- one should not obstruct the *anusthaana* of the *aachaarya; puraana* is to be told at that time. Maitreya asks a question. 



***Paraan baahya kudrushteen samyak pramaana   
tarkaih aashrunaati iti paraasharah, ... *** How Paraashara got that name; those who say that they are following the Vedaas but give wrong meanings to the Vedic mantraas; with proper *pramaanaas* and the logic for those *pramaanaas,* Paraashara wins over them. 



***... tam munivaram samyak jnyaanavantam kruta pourvaanhika kriyam   
bhagavat samaaraadhana aadinaa visheshato vimala manasam |*** Doing *poorvaanhika* is all *bhagavat aaraadhana* only, at that time, mind is very pure, and clear. 



***Pari papraccha - paritah papraccha, puraanaartham iti sheshah |*** He asked everything in detail. 



 [[11]] ***Kaartsnyena artha vishesha anabhiniveshena saamaanyato \* yanmayam   
ityaadi vakshyamaana prakaarena |*** The question does not ask everything that he wanted to know. This is going to be told later. 



***Atah prashna anuroopena prati vachanam api na kachit aagrahena   
krutam |*** Because of the question, the *prativachana* is not made due to some *aagraha*, force. This means that it is according to *shrutis* only. 



***Tena asya puraanasya laingaadivat na kachit pakshapaatitvam |*** There is no bias in the reply. 



In this introduction we saw the greatness of this work, the validity of this work as established by Sri Sudarshana Suri, and have just begun by doing this *mangala kaarya*. We pray to all our *aachaaryas* to grace us to take the study of this great work to completion. 



We studied the *first shloka. Soota pouraanika* in *Naimishaaranya* is supposed to have taught all the *puraanaas*. He is said to be *Romaharshana's* son in one place, and in another place is said to be *Romaharshana* himself. He is a *rishi*. 




## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 1: *** ***Sri Soota uvaacha - *** ***Paraasharam munivaram kruta pourvaanhika kriyam |*** ***Maitrayah pari papraccha pranipatya abhivaadhya cha ||***  [[12]] *Parashara*, the *muni shreshta*, having completed his *aanhika kriyaas - **Maitraya rishi* approached him by doing *namaskaara* and *abhivaadana *\(this is how a *shishya* is supposed to approach an *aachaarya*\), and asked to explain all the *puraana arthaas* in detail. 



*Paritah papraccha pari papraccha. * 



***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shlokaas 2, 3:*** ***Tvatto hi vedaadhyanam adheetam akhilam guro |*** ***Dharma shaastraani sarvaani tathaa angaani yathaa kramam ||*** 



***Tvat prasaadaat muni shreshta mama anyena akruta shramam |*** ***Vakshyanti sarva shaastreshu praayasho ye api vidvishah ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary*** ***Atha maitreyah chaturdasha vidyaa aabhooshita puraana adhigame   
trayodasha vidyaasthaana adhigama lakshanasya aatmano   
adhikaarasya tat prasaada labdhatva anuvaadena gurum stuvan   
puraana pravachane protsaahayati tvatto hi iti dvayena | *** By the two *shlokaas* starting with *tvattah*, among the fourteen *vidyaa **sthaanaas, Maitreya* is now eligible to study the thirteenth one which is *puraana*, 'I have studied all these through your grace', is requesting him to teach the *puraana*. 



*Angaani vedaah chatvaarah meemaamsaa nyaaya vistarah |* *Puraanam dharma shaastram cha vidyaah hi etaah chaturdashaah ||* 



 [[13]] ***Khilam prahatamanaamnaatam parishishtaakhyam shree sooktaadikam   
tat akhilam aamnaatam eva yathaa syaat tathaa vedaadhyanam   
adheetam adhigatam praaptam |*** Sri Engal Aalwaan gives two different ways by which it can be interpreted. Among the *Vedaas, Sri Sookta* is said to be *khila bhaaga*, as it does not have *svara* like *Purusha Sookta *\(though it is uttered using a particular *svara*\); I should be the one who has studied even the *khila **bhaaga*; I have done *veda adhyayana* under you in such a way. *Akhilam* means that even the *khila bhaaga* has been studied, without leaving any part. 



***Khila bhaagasya api adhyayanam tvatta eva praaptam iti arthah |*** I have studied even the *khila bhaagaas* from you only. 



***Yat vaa akhilam krutsnam yathaa kramam sva shaakhaa adhyayana   
poorvakam ruga aadi kramaan atikramena \* atah poorvam tu   
chandaamsi shukleshu niyatah pathet |*** The other meaning is: I have studied everything, all the Vedaas, first studying the *sva shaakhaa *\(the *shaakhaa* I belong to\) and the remaining. There is also a way in which Veda is supposed to be studied. In the *Shukla **paksha*, one has to study the *chandas*. 



***Krushna pakshe tathaa angaani maasaan vipro ardha panchamaan |*** In *Krishna paksha*, one has to study the *angaas* for five and a half months. The remaining part of the year is meant for practicing what has been learnt. 



***Ityaadi ukta krama anatikramena cha |***  [[14]] Following exactly the *krama* which is prescribed for *Veda adhyayana*, I have done the complete *Veda adhyayana* under you. Or, including the *khila **bhaagas, yathaa kramam*, I have studied everything including the *dharma **shaastraas*, as prescribed. 



***Tvat prasaadaat iti | Anye janaah na vidvishah te api sarva   
shaastreshu tvat prasaadaat akruta shramam maam na vakshyanti,   
kintu tvat prasaadaat eva kruta sarva shaastra parichayam maam   
samaavartanaanantaram vakshyanti | Anyena iti padachhede maam   
sarva shaastreshu tvat prasaadaat anyena upaayena akruta shramam   
vakshyanti, kintu tvat prasaadaadena eva kruta shramam vakshyanti iti   
arthah |*** 



*Maam anye na akruta shramam* and *Maam anyena akruta shramam *- these are the two *padachhedaas*. Those who do not like me, they will not say that I have not studied under you, through your grace. This means that *tvat **prasaadaat* is important here. After I have finished all the studies, they will tell that through your grace only I have studied all the *shaastraas*. 



In the second *padachheda*, not through any means other than your grace, I have studied all the *shaastraas*. 



There are certain *shishyaas* who study through many *aachaaryaas*, and there are those who study everything under one *aachaarya*. 





## 4
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 4: *** ***So aham icchaami dharmajnya shrotum tvatto yathaa jagat |*** ***Babhoova bhooyah cha yathaa mahaabhaaga bhavishyati ||*** Now, *Maitreya rishi* asks what he would like to know.  [[15]] 



***So aham iti | Ya evam veda aadi trayodasha vidyaa sthaana abhijnyah   
sah aham jagat janma aadi puraanaartham shrotum icchaami iti arthah   
| *** I who have studied the thirteen *vidyaa sthaanaas* like to listen from you how this world was created, how it is sustained, where does it go and merge during *pralaya*, the meanings of the *puraanaas*. 



***Anena brahma yajnya adhyayana artham veda uprabrahmanaartham   
cha puraanasya grahanaadou tat yogya traivarnikaanaam eva   
adhikaara ukto jnyeyah | *** What we can understand is that studying the *puraanaas*, is for two purposes - in order to use it in the *brahma yajnyaas*, and to understand the meanings of the *Vedaas*; here the *adhikaara* is for *traivarnikaas* only. 



***Paapa kshayaadi artham tu puraana shravanaadou stree shoodrayoh   
api adhikaarah | *** In order to get rid of the sins, and for all good, everybody has *adhikaara*. 



***Yathaa uktam bhavishyat puraane \* Adhyetavyam na cha anyena   
braahmana kshatriyayoh vinaa | Shrotavyam etat shoodrena na   
adhyetavyam kadaachana | *** Doing *adhyayana* and *shravana* are two different things. Doing *adhyayana* is in a proper way, with *svara* and *sookshma arthaas. Shravana* is for *paapa **kshaya*, just listening sitting with others. Others should not do *adhyayana*. Others should only listen. 



***Tasmaat shoodraih vinaa vipraah na shrotavyam kadaachana | Iti |   
Vilomajaanaam tu shravana aadou na adhikaarah | Soota aadeh tu *** [[16]] ***vilomajasya api puraana vachanam \* dharma esha tu sootasya sadbhih   
drushtah puraatanah \* ityaadi vachanaat aviruddham | *** *Vilomajaas* are those born to a woman of a higher caste and man of a lower caste. *Anuloma* is when father is of a higher caste and mother of a lower caste. *Vilomajaas* do not have *adhikaara* in *shravana* also, is what Sri Engal Aalwaan says. What the *soota* is telling is *dharma* only, is what is told by *sajjanaas*. There is a *Paadma Puraana vachana* here, where *Vyaasa **shishya soota* is teaching others in *Naimishaaranya*. This *vaakya* comes in *Paadma Puraana*. The *soota* told here is a *rishi*, and is different from the *vilomajaa* told earlier. This justifies why *soota pouraanika* is teaching this. 



***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shlokaas 5 to 10:*** ***Yanmayam cha jagat brahmanyataschaitah charaacharam |*** ***Leenam aaseet yathaa yatra layameshyati yatra cha ||*** 



***Yat pramaanaanaani bhootaani devaadeenaam cha sambhavam |*** ***Samudra parvataanaam cha samsthaanam cha yathaa bhuvah ||*** 



***Sooryaadeenaam cha samsthaanam pramaanam munisattama |*** ***Devaadeenaam tathaa vamshaan manoon manvantaraani cha ||*** 



***Kalpaan kalpa vibhaagaanscha chaaturyuga vikalpitaan |*** ***Kalpaantasya svaroopam cha yuga dharmaanscha krutsnashah ||*** 



***Devarshi paartivaanaam cha charitam yat mahaamune |***  [[17]] ***Veda shaakhaa pranayanam yathaavat vyaasa kartrukam ||*** 



***Dharmaanscha braahmanaadeenaam tathaa cha aashramavaasinaam |*** ***Shrotum icchaami aham sarvam tvatto vaashishtanandana ||*** 



***\* Yathaa jagat babhoova iti upakramya \* aashrama vaasinaam iti   
antena prashtavyaan arthaan aaha | *** Starting with *yathaa jagat babhoova* till *aashrama vaasinaam*, the first half of *Shloka* 10, whatever he wanted to known, *Maitreya rishi* has asked. 



***Atra bhagavataa bhaashyakaarena brahma svaroopa vishesha tat   
vibhooti bheda prakaaraah tat aaraadhana roopa phala visheshaah cha   
prushtaah iti prushtavyaartha visheshaah uktaah |*** Now, *Engal Aalwaan* quotes *Bhaashyakaarar*, some specific characteristics of *Brahma svaroopa* are being asked, along with various modes, *prakaaraas*, various benefits that we attain by worshipping the *Bhagavaan*. 



***Yathaa jagat ityaadi \* layameshyati yatra cha, ityantam brahma   
svaroopa vishesha prashnah | *** This is commented in Sri Bhaashya and Vedaartha Sangraha also. This is asking about the special characteristics, *vishesha* of *Brahma svaroopa*, essential nature of *Brahman*. 



***Yat pramaanaani ityaadi chaturyuga iti antam vibhooti bheda prakaara   
prashnaah | *** These *shlokaas* are asking about *vibhooti bheda prakaara*. 



 [[18]] ***Dharmaascha ityaadi ardhena tat aaraadhaana roopa phala vishesha   
prashnou prushtou | *** These *shlokaas* ask about *aaraadhana roopa* and *phala vishesha*. 



***Brahma svaroopasya yato vaa imaani ityaadi vaakya siddhatvaat tad   
vishesha eva atra prashtavya iti bhaashyakaarena brahma svaroopa   
vishesha prashnah iti uktam | *** If we say that Maitreya is asking about *Brahma svaroopa*, it will be a repetition as it is already established in the Brahma Sutraas itself, and in the Shrutis. Because it is already established in the *Shrutis*, there is no need to again ask it, but we can ask for certain specific additional characteristics about *Brahma svaroopa*. This is the reason why Bhaashyakaarar says that *Brahma svaroopa vishesha prashnaas* are asked here. 



***Nanu naaraayana anuvaaka aadibhih svaroopasya vishesho api   
nirdhaaritah | *** *Svaroopa vishesha* was also already established in *Naaraayana anuvaaka*. If so, why should it be said that *brahma svaroopa vishesha prashna* is being raised here? 



***Satyam, aneka anuvaaka viprakeernayoh saamaanya visheshayoh   
ekatra samaahrutya vachane hi vyaktih bhavati | *** It is true, but they are spread across many *anuvaakaas*; in one place it is told in generic terms, at other place, it is told in specific terms. In different places different terms are used - *jyoti, aakaasha, praana, yatah, tat, **brahma*, etc. In some places, it is told as *Naaraayana*. If everything is brought to one place and told, then only it becomes clear. 



***Etat eva hi puraana aadikrutyam veda upabrahmanam | ***  [[19]] This is the work of the *puraanaas* which do the *upabrahmanaaas*. 



***Yathaa babhoova yathaa bhavishyati iti sarva srushtishu kim eka   
prakaaraa srushtih uta aneka prakaaraa bhinna kramaah vaa iti   
prashnah | *** How did it happen, and how is it going to happen in future, in all the *srushtis*, how was it done, and in future how is it going to be done; is it the same way it is done in all the *srushtis*, or is it done in different ways at different times? 



***Atra utpatti layayoh prushtatvaat sthiti prashnah api abhipretah sthiti   
samyamakartaa iti prativachana darshanaat |*** *Sthiti prashna* is not specifically asked here; about how does it exist, sustain? This has to be understood. This is because of the answer given to this question as *sthiti samyama kartaasau*. 



***Yanmayam iti | Yatah cha etat charaacharam iti nimitta upaadaanayoh   
prushtatvaat yanmayam iti anena srushtyaadi karma bhootam jagat   
kim aatmakam iti prushtam | *** The meaning of *yanmayam* is to be understood clearly - from which are all these movables and immovables born, created - this is about *nimitta* and *upaadaana kaarana*. 



For every effect, there are three types of causes - *upaadaana **kaarana *\(material cause\), *nimitta kaarana *\(efficient / intelligent cause\) and *sahakaari kaarana *\(instrumental cause\). For making a pot, mud is the *upaadaana kaarana*, the potter is the *nimitta kaarana*; both *upaadaana **kaarana* and *nimitta kaarana* are required in every work that we see in the world. If *kaarya* has to happen, there have to be these *kaaranaas*. Those two are asked here - *yatah cha*, including both *upaadaana* and *nimitta* [[20]] *kaaranaas*. What is the *upaadaana kaarana* for this world? What is the *nimitta kaarana* for this world? Here, the word *karma* means the effect, what is created, the object of creation which is *jagat*. What is the *jagat* made of - is it without any *aatman*, does it exist independently by itself, or is it controlled by *Paramaatman* as the *antaryaami*, this is the question asked here. 



***Tasya cha uttaram jagat cha sah iti | Idam taadaatmyam antaryaami   
roopena aatmatayaa avasthaana krutam na tu vastu aikya krutam, ... *** The answer given here is ' *Jagat cha sah*', He is only the *jagat*, the world. *Taadaatmyam* means oneness, identity. This means that *Bhagavaan* is existing as *antaryaami*, inner controller of everything; He controls everything in the form of an *antaryaami*; it is not by the identity of two objects. It is not that *jagat* and *Brahman* merge together and become one. 



*Sarvam niyantrutayaa aapnoti iti aatmaa. * 



***... yanmayam iti prashnasya uttaratvaat jagat cha sah iti   
saamaanaadhikaranyasya | *** There are two words *jagat* and *sah - jagat* is the world which is created and *sah* is *Paramaatman*. They are told in concomitant coordination, *saamaanaadhikaranya*. The answer given is 'He is the world', means, 'Is He different from the world?' or 'Is He one with the world?'; it is *saamaanaadhikaranya*, which is ' *Bhinna pravrutti nimittaanaam **shabdaanaam ekasmin arthe vruttih saamaanaadhikaranyam*'; both words jagat and* sah* in the same *vibhakti, prathama vibhakti eka vachana *- are they the same, or are they qualifying the same object, is what we have to understand; the meaning here is that *Paramaatman* is *jagat antaryaami*. The *chara achara aatmaka prapancha* and *Paramaatman* are not identical; but *Paramaatman* who is the creator of the world, the *jagat kaarana*, and *Paramaatman* who is the *antaryaami* of the *jagat*, the identity is  [[21]] between these two. This is how the *saamaanaadhikaranya* has to be understood. When we say that *Devadatta* is handsome, handsomeness is one the the qualities of *Devadatta*. Identity is between *Devadatta* who is qualified by that quality, and *Devadatta *- there is identity between them; and not between the quality of handsomeness and *Devadatta*. 



***Yanmayam iti atra mayat na vikaaraarthah; pruthak prashna   
vaiyyarthyaat | *** There is a *pratyaya* in *vyaakarana* called *mayat*; this *mayat pratyaya* is used in three different senses - *svaartha, vikaaraartha* and *praachuryaartha. **Svaartha* means that it represents that itself; *vikaaraartha* shows the modification of that; *praachuryaartha* means abundance of that. We see this clearly in *annamaya, praanamaya*, etc.; *annamaya* is *vikaaraartha*, where the *vikaara* of *anna* is *deha; praanamaya* is in *svaartha, **praanamaya* is *praana; aanandamaya* is *praachuryaartha*, abundance of *aananda; jnyaanamaya* is *praachuryaartha*, abundance of *jnyaana*; Here, the sense in which the *mayat pratyaya* is used is discussed here. Here, if *mayat* is used in *vikaaraartha*, there is no need to ask *yatah etat **charaacharam*, etc. - these questions would not have been required at all. 



***Na api praanamaya aadivat svaarthikah; jagat cha sa iti uttara   
anupapatteh | *** It is also not in *svaartha*, like it comes in *praanamaya*. If it had been in *svaartha, brahmamayam* means Brahman only, and *jagat cha sah* would not have been the right answer for this. 



***Tadaa hi vishnuh eva iti uttaram abhavishyat |*** If it had been *svaartha*, the answer would have been Vishnu only. This was not the answer given by *Paraasharar*; the answer was *jagat cha sah*. 



 [[22]] ***Atah praachuryaartha eva |*** The usage is in *praachuryaartha*, abundance. 



***Krutsnam jagat tad aatmakatayaa tat prachurameva |*** All this world is having *Paramaatman* as the *aatman*, and so it has abundance of Brahman. Abundance of Brahman, which is *aatman* of everything, *chara, achara* in this world, is what is meant by *yanmayam*. 



***Tasmaat yanmayam iti asya prativachanam jagat cha sah iti   
saamaanaadhikaranyam shareera aatma bhaava nibandhanam |*** From this, what we can conclude is that ' *yanmayam*' is the question, and ' *jagat cha sah*' is the answer; the *saamaanaadhikaranya* is because of *shareera aatma bhaava nibandhanam*. This is the greatest contribution of *Bhaashyakaarar* who established the *shareera shareeri bhaava*, which is a *pradhaana pratitantra*, unique to our *siddhaanta*. 



Just as we exist in our body, we have *shareera* which has hands, legs, head, etc., and the *aatman* is inside, controlling everything; *shareera* is dependent on the *aatman, shareera* is supported by the *aatman*, and the *shareera* is meant for the purposes of the *aatman, aatman* is the controller; the relation between *shareera* and *aatman* is of three types - \(i\) *shareera* is *aadheya, aatman* is *aadhaara*, \(ii\) *shareera* is *niyaamya*, and *aatman* is *niyaamaka*, \(iii\) *shareera* is *shesha*, and *aatman* is *sheshi*. These are the three - *aadheya - aadhaara, niyaamya - niyaamaka, shesha - **sheshi*. If these three relationships exist all the time, they are said to be *shareera aatma bhaava* or *shareera shareeri bhaava*. The *saamaanaadhikaranya* here is *shareera aatma bhaava nibandhanam*; which means that *jagat* is the *shareera* for *Paramaatman* who is the *aatman*, and *sah* represent *Paramaatman* who is the creator of this world. *Paramaatman* who is qualified by *jagat* [[23]] *kaaranatva* and *Paramaatman* who is having *jagat* as His *shareera*, there is identity between these two. 



***Anyathaa baadhaayaam saamaanaadhikaranyaashrayanena nirvishesha   
vastu pratipaadana paratve shaastrasya abhyupagamyamaane sarvaani   
etaanai prashna prativachanaani na sangaccheran, tat vivaranaroopam   
cha krutsnam shaastram |*** If it is not understood like that, if we take the identity that *jagat* is also Brahman, then *jagat* would not exist, it would become *baadhita, jagat* gets stultified, and Brahman only remains; then this would establish Brahman as not having any attributes, if one accepts like that, the questions asked by *Maitreyar* and answers given by *Paraashara* would not make any sense, the *Vishnu Puraana* which explaining the meanings of these questions and answers, will be of no use. 



***Tat pakshe hi prapancha bhramasya kim adhisthaanam, nirvishesha   
jnyaana maatram iti prashna prativachane syaataam |*** If that had been the case that there is only identity, and attribute-less Brahman, then what should have been the questions and answers - the question should have been 'What is the locus of this delusion of the form of *prapancha*, this appearance of the form of this world', the answer should have been *nirvishesha jnyaana maatram*; but this is not the answer given here and not the question raised here. 



***Jagat cha sah iti jagat brahmanoh eka dravyatvena   
saamaanaadhikaranye cha brahmanah kalyaana gunaaikataanatvam   
heya pratyaneekatvam cha baadhyeta; sarva ashubha aaspadam cha   
brahma bhavet |*** The second opinion is that: If we say that Brahman is not *nirvishesha*, that Brahman is *jagat* itself, that Brahman only exists in all these forms, they are the same material, because the world is filled with inconsistencies and  [[24]] impurities, then all the qualities of Brahman, being an abode to only auspicious qualities, being opposed to anything that is defiling, would not be there; Brahman would then be attributes to all the impurities; so it cannot be taken like that. 



***Tasmaat aatma shareera bhaava eva idam saamaanaadhikaranyam   
mukhyam iti vakshyaamah |*** This is the *siddhaanta*, that the *saamaanaadhikaranya jagat cha sah*, is *aatma shareera bhaava*, this is how it should be understood. 



Another objection is addressed here. ***Na cha yatah cha iti yasya kaarana maatra vaachitve api yanmayam iti   
asya upaadaana kaarana vishayatvaat gobalivardhanyaanena yata iti   
nimitta kaarana param iti vaachyam; ... *** We cannot say like this - that *yatah ch* a is the *nimitta kaarana*, and *yanmayam* as the *upaadaana kaarana*, 



***... tasya agatika vishayatvaat atra mayatah praachuryaarthatvena   
gatyantara upapaadanaat cha |*** because, by accepting the *praachuryaartha* for *mayat* here, we are able to explain clearly that it is *shareera aatma shareera nibandhana*; if there was no other way to explain that, then we could have taken *nimitta **kaarana* in *yatah* and *upaadaana kaarana* in *yanmayam*; but that is not so, as we are able to reasonably explain *saamaanaadhikaranya* as *shareera aatma **bhaava*. 



***Svaarthikatve yat jagat iti prashnasya vishnuh jagat iti uttare kaa   
anupapattih iti chet; tadaa hi baadhaayaam saamaanaadhikaranyam   
abhihitam syaat |***  [[25]] Suppose we take *svaarthika*, for the question 'What is this *jagat*', the answer 'Vishnu only is *jagat*', then also it is reasonable, isn't it? is the objection. then also it would mean *baadha*, because *jagat* would get stultified. 



***Tatah cha sthaanuh eva na purusha itivat vishnureva na jagat iti arthah   
syaat |*** This is like asking a question when seeing a pole - is it a person standing there, or is it a pole? When we go nearby, we say clearly that it is a pillar and not a person. 



***Tathaa jagat vishnuh iti jagat brahmanoh aikya upadeshasya na jagat   
vishnuh iti vaiyadhikaranyam iti arthah syaat iti shruti viruddhaa   
ashruta baadha kalpanaa syaat |*** In that case it is not like ' *Sthaanureva na purushah*', it will become like ' *Vishnureva na jagat*'; just as *sthaanu* and *purusha* are told in *vaiyadhikaranya*, not in *saamaanaadhikaranya*, and this will lead to *shruti **viruddha*, it will be against what is told in the *shrutis*. Stultifying the world as not true is not told in the *shrutis*. 



***Arthavatve siddhyati mayatah svaarthakatvena vaiyarthyam cha   
ayuktam |*** In *mayat pratyaya*, if you are not able to explain the meaning well by taking *svaartha*, whereas you are able to explain the meaning well by taking *praachuryaartha*, then we should take *praachuryaartha*. We should not take *svaartha*, which will lead to *vaiyarthya*, we will not be able to explain properly. 



***Leenam aaseet yathaa yatra yena kramena yatra leenam sa kaaranam |*** It is explained in what order everything goes and merges during *pralaya*.  [[26]] We studied the first six *shlokaas so far*. *Maitreyar* requested *Paraashara **Muni* to teach him the cause of the universe. The word *yanmayam* was commented upon in detail. This is due to *shareera aatma bhaava **nibandhana*, this is the same way explained in Sri Bhaashya by Bhaashyakaarar. 





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 6: *** ***Yat pramaanaanaani bhootaani devaadeenaam cha sambhavam |*** ***Samudra parvataanaam cha samsthaanam cha yathaa bhuvah ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yat pramaanaani iti | Pruthivyaadeeni yat pramaanaani iti mahaa   
bhootaadeenaam iyattaa prashnah, jagatah pramiti saadhana   
prashnascha |*** What is the measure of *pruthivi, aapas, tejas*, etc., to know about the origin and end of this world, the origin of *devaas* and others; the oceans and hills, where were they existing, and how were they supported. All these things I would like to know, is what *Maitreyar* is asking. 



*Iyatta* means measure, expanse. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 7: *** ***Sooryaadeenaam cha samsthaanam pramaanam munisattama |*** ***Devaadeenaam tathaa vamshaan manoon manvantaraani cha ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sooryaadeenaam iti | Manvantaraani manoonaam kaalaah |*** *Manvantaraani* means the time period when *Manus* existed. The sun and others - what is the *aadhaara* for all this? 



***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shlokaas 8, 9:*** ***Kalpaan kalpa vibhaagaanscha chaaturyuga vikalpitaan |*** ***Kalpaantasya svaroopam cha yuga dharmaanscha krutsnashah ||*** 



***Devarshi paartivaanaam cha charitam yat mahaamune |*** ***Veda shaakhaa pranayanam yathaavat vyaasa kartrukam ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Kalpaan iti | Kalpaan brahma aayurmitaan mahaa kalpaan, chaturyuga   
vikalpitaan chaturyuga parivrutti kalpitaan, chaturyugaih   
aavartamaanaih vibhaktaan iti arthah | Kalpa vibhaagaan mahaa kalpa   
amshaan padmaadeen brahma divasaan, kalpaantah pralayah | *** [[27]] ***Chaaturyugam bhaavi veda vibhajanam, chaturyugasya parimaanam iti   
vaa |*** *Kalpaan* means limited to, or extending up to the life of Brahma. The *chaturyugaas* keep repeating again and again, *kalpaas* are divided into four *yugaas* which keep repeating again and again. *Kalpa* means *Padma, **Koorma*, etc, which are told as *brahma divasaas*, they are all parts of the *mahaa kalpa*, they are all days of Brahma. *Kalpa anta* means *pralaya*, the end of the *kalpa*. How the *Vedaas* are going to be divided. The *devarshis*, kings, their story; how the *Veda shaakhaas* were all formed, whose *pravartana* was done by *Vyaasa*, how *Vyaasa* divided the *Vedaas*. All these things I would like to know. 



***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shlokaas 10, 11:*** ***Dharmaanscha braahmanaadeenaam tathaa cha aashramavaasinaam |*** ***Shrotum icchaami aham sarvam tvatto vaasishtanandana ||*** 



***Brahman prasaada pravanam kurushva mayi maanasam |*** ***Yena aham etat jaaneeyaam tvat prasaadaat mahaa mune ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Dharmaan iti | Sarvam anyat yogaadi cha |*** ***Vaasishta nandana iti aamantranena guru prasaadaat eva jnyaanam   
ityuktayaa cha puraatanam vasishtha varadaana vruttaantam   
samsmaarito hrushtah paraasharah vakshyamaanasya arthasya   
shraddheyatva siddhaye tam vruttaantam aakhyaayaati saadhu   
ityaadinaa |*** All the *dharmaas*, the *varna dharmaas* and *aashrama dharmaas*, I would like to know. I would like to learn about all these things. *Maitreyar* addresses *Paraashara* as *Vaasishta Nandana, **Vasishtha's* son is *Vaasishta*, *Shakti; Vaasishtha's* son is *Vaasishta Nandana*. The moment *Maitreyar* says that 'I would like to listen to all these things from you, O son of *Shakti*, who is son of *Vasishtha', Paraasharar* was very pleased and started telling the story. *Jnyaana* one can attain only with the grace of *aachaaryaas, Paraasharar* was reminded about how he received a boon from *Vasistha*, he became very pleased, and in order that *Maitreyar* and others get the *shraddhe* required in the meanings which are going to be taught, he starts telling that story. One should have *shraddhe* in what is going to be taught, means that it is *praamaanika*, 



 [[28]] *Maitreyar* says that 'By your grace only I will know about all these things; let your mind be pleased towards me; grace me with all these details; let your grace flow towards me'. 



***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shlokaas 12, 13, 14, 15:*** ***Sri Paraashara uvaacha -*** ***Saadhu maitreya dharmajnya smaaritah asmi puraatanam |*** ***Pituh pitaa me bhagavaan vasishtho yat uvaacha ha ||*** *Sri Paraashara* said - O *Maitreya*, I am very pleased, one who knows the *dharmaas*; I was reminded about the old story. My father's father *Vasishtha*, whatever he said, I am reminded of that. I will tell you that. 



***Vishvaamitra prayuktena rakshasaa bhakshitah puraa |*** ***Shrutah taatah tatah krodho maitreya abhoot mama atulah ||*** 



***Tato aham rakshasaam satram vinaashaaya samaarabham |*** ***Bhasmeebhootaah cha shatashah tasmin satre nischaacharaah ||*** 



***Tatah sanksheeyamaaneshu teshu rakshassu asheshatah |*** ***Maam uvaacha mahaa bhaago vasishtho mat pitaamahah ||*** 



This story is told in *Mahaabhaarata* also. *Vasishta's* son *Shakti* is crossing over a bridge, and there is place for only one person to cross. On the other side, *Kalmaaashapaada*, a king will be coming. Both of them want the other person to leave way, and both do not want to yield. *Kalmaaashapaada* gets angry and hit *Shakti* with his whip; and *Shakti* gets very angry, and curses him to become a *nara maamsa bhakshaka*, a man who eats human flesh. *Vishwamitra* comes there, and makes the king get the curse immediately, and *Kalmaaashapaada* eats *Shakti*. Then *Vasishtha* loses all his sons, and being without any progeny, he decides to commit suicide. He is unable to commit suicide, because of his powers as a *rishi*; wherever he goes, an ocean, etc. nothing happens to him. He comes back, and suddenly listens to Veda being chanted, and seeks where it is coming from. He comes to know that the *Veda paaraayana* is coming from the womb of *Shakti's* wife, *Adrushyanti*. He becomes happy that *Adrushyanti* is pregnant, and his progeny is going to continue. *Adrushyanti* gives birth to *Paraasharar; Paraasharar* thinks that *Vasishta* is his father, and calls him so. *Adrushyanti* says that it is not so, and that his father was eaten up. Because of this, *Paraasharar* becomes very angry. Then *Paraasharar* started a *Satra yaaga*, for destruction of all the *raakshasaas*. Hundreds  [[29]] of *raakshasaas* will come and fall into that, and will be burnt into ashes. At the time the *raakshasaas* are getting destroyed, *Vasishta* came and told *Paraashara* these words. 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 16: *** ***Alam atyanta kopena taata manyum imam jahi |*** ***Raakshasaa naaparaadhyanti pituh te vihitam hi tat ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Alam iti | Manyum satram |*** *Vasishta* says - 'Enough of this anger, stop this *satra. Raakshaaas* have not done any *aparaadha*, because your father's fate was that'. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 17: *** ***Moodhaanaam eva bhavati krodho jnyaanavataam kutah |*** ***Hanyate taata kah kena yatah sva kruta bhuk pumaan ||*** Anger comes to only *moodhaas*, the ignorant ones. For the knowledgeable ones, this should not happen. Who is killed by whom? Every person experiences the fruits of ones own doings. 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 18: *** ***Sanchitasya api mahataa vatsa kleshena maanavaih |*** ***Yasasah tapasah cha eva krodho naashakarah parah ||*** They have all accumulated *punya paapaas* of their own doing over a long period of time, from beginningless time, and they have to experience all of this. Fame and *tapas *- anger destroys all that. 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 19: *** ***Svarga apavarga vyaasedhakaaranam paramarshayah |*** ***Varjayanti sadaa krodham taata maa tat vasho bhava ||*** Anger prevents *svarga* and *apavarga \(moksha\)*. That is why *rishis* control their anger. Don't get into the sway of anger. You have to control the anger. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yasastapasoh naashe svarga apavarga saadhana dharma jnyaana   
pratibandho jaayate iti aaha svarga iti |*** The cause of *svarga* and *apavarga*, which is *jnyaana* and *dharma *- anger obstructs that. *Krodha* prevents someone from following dharma, and *jnyaana* does not arise. 





## 20
 [[30]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 20: *** ***Alam nishaacharaih dagdhaih deenaih anapakaaribhih |*** ***Satram te viramatu etat kshamaa saaraa hi saadhavah ||*** They have not done any *apakaara* to you, and they are helpless. They are getting burnt here - all the *nishaacharaas*. Stop this *satra yaaga*. This is a beautiful statement - *kshamaa saaraa hi saadhavaah *- the power of *saadhus* is *kshamaa* itself, forbearance. 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 21: *** ***Evam taatena tena aham anuneeto mahaatmanaa |*** ***Upasamhrutavaan satram sadhyah tat vaakya gouravaat ||*** Immediately, in order to respect *Vasishta's* words, I stopped that *Satra*, being told like that by the *Mahaatma Vasistha*. 





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 22: *** ***Tatah preetah sa bhagavaan vasishto munisattamah |*** ***Sampraaptah cha tadaa tatra pulastyo brahmanah sutah ||*** *Vasishta* was very pleased, at the same time, Brahma's son *Pulastya* also came there. *Pulastya* is of the *Raakshasa vamsha*. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 23: *** ***Pitaamahena dattaarghyah kruta aasana parigrahah |*** ***Maam uvaacha mahaa bhaago maitreya pulahaagrajah ||*** Immediately, *Vasishta* gives *argha, paada, aasana* to *Pulastya*, and makes him seated. *Pulastya*, the elder brother of *Pulaha*, told me thus. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 24: *** ***Pulastya uvaacha - *** ***Vaire mahati yat vaakyaat guroh adya aashritaa kshamaa |*** ***Tvayaa tasmaat samaastaani bhavaan shaastraani vetsyati ||*** When you had great enmity against the *raakshasaas*, in order to listen to the words of *Vasishta*, when you have now resorted to *kshamaa*, you will attain the knowledge of all the *shaastraas*. 





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 25: *** ***Santateh na mamocchedah kruddhena api yatah krutah |*** ***Tvayaa tasmaat mahaa bhaaga dadaami anyam mahaa varam ||*** My *santati* was not broken by you even when you were very angry against all the *raakshasaas*. Because of this, I will give you one more great boon. 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 26: ***  [[31]] ***Puraana samhitaa kartaa bhavaan vatsa bhavishyati |*** ***Devataa paramaarthyam cha yathaavat vetsyathe bhavaan ||*** You will also become the *kartaa* of *puraana samhitaa*. You will know as it is the reality about who is the supreme god. Because of this itself, this *puraana* is *praamaanika*. It is because of this that *Paraasharar* was given the boon. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Puraaneti | Samhitaa tulyatvaat samhitaa tasyaah kartaa | Yathaavat   
vetsyate vibhooti vigraha guna karma svabhaava aadibhih devataam   
asamshaya viparyaasam yathaavat jnyaasyati |*** This is equivalent to *samhitaa. Samhitaa* is part of *Vedaas*. You will know without any doubt, in a proper way, not knowing something differently or wrongly. You will know the supreme deity along with the *vibhooti*, glories, *vigraha*, attributes, the acts, the various qualities - you will know all this without any doubt. 





## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 27: *** ***Pravrutte cha nivrutte cha karmani astamalaa matih |*** ***Mat prasaadaat asandigdhaa tava vatsa bhavishyati ||*** Your mind will very clearly understand the *pravrutti* and *nivrutti karmaas*, due to my grace. You will have no doubt. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Pravrutta iti | Pravruttam kaamyam karma | Nivruttam nishkaamam   
jnyaana poorvakam | Astamalaa ajnyaana viparyaasa rahitaa |*** *Astamalaa matih* means not getting the wrong understanding. *Nivrutti **karma* is *nishkaama karma* with the knowledge of the *aatman*, and not desiring any fruits. *Pravrutti karmaas* are *kaamya karmaas*. 





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 28: *** ***Tatah cha praaha bhagavaan vasistho me pitaamahah |*** ***Pulastyena yat uktam te sarvam etat bhavishyati ||*** When one *rishi* gives a *vara*, another *rishi* is telling ' *Tathaastu*' - 'Let it happen like that'. *Vasishta* said ' *Tathaastu*'. 





## 29
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 29: *** ***Iti poorvam vasishthena pulastyena cha dheemataa |*** ***Yat uktam tat smrutim yaati tvat prashnaat akhilam mama ||*** I am now reminded of all that what *Vasistha* and *Pulastya* said, by your question.  [[32]] 





## 30
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 30: *** ***So aham vadaami ashesham te maitreya pariprucchate |*** ***Puraana samhitaam samyak taam nibodha yathaa tatham ||*** I, who was given this boon by none other than *Vasishtar* and *Pulastyar*, I have perceived it as they exist directly, with the grace of the *aachaaryaas*, I am telling to you, who are asking this question. This *puraana **samhitaa* which is equivalent to *samhitaa*, I am telling you as it is, properly, listen to this. 





## 31
***Sri Vishnu Puraana - Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 31: *** ***Vishnoh sakaashaat udbhootam jagat tatra eva cha sthitam |*** ***Sthiti samyama kartaa asou jagato asya jagat cha sah ||*** This *shloka* summarizes the *puraana arthaas*. This world was created from Vishnu, and this world is existing in Him only. He is the Creator, He is responsible for sustenance also, He only is responsible for ultimately taking it to Himself, controlling it. He is only the world. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Atha bhagavaan paraasharo ya evam guru prasaadaat saakshaatkruta   
shaastra arthah so aham vadaami iti svasya gurutva adhikaaram   
soochayan prashneshu jagat kaarana vastu visheshah, tena cha jagatah   
sambandha prakaara visheshesha cha prushtuh praadhaanyena   
jijnyaasita iti jaanan pradhaana bhoota prashna prati vachanatvena   
sankshepatah puraanaartham aaha - vishnoh sakaashaat iti |*** *Paraashara's* word indicates that now he has the *adhikaara*, capacity to teach you this. *So aham* means 'I have been graced by my *aachaaryaas* to attain all this knowledge, as it existed. I have perceived all this directly'. The question that Maitreya desired to know is: what is that *vastu* which is the cause of this universe, what is the relation between the creator of this universe, and this universe itself? These are the main things that *Maitreyar* desired to know. With this, the main answer for the question is summarized here, the essence of the *puraana*, which is answered with ' *Vishnoh sakaashaat*'. 



***Tathaa hi - mumukshoh kshetrajnyasya \* yato vaa imaani jaayante \* tat   
kaaranam saankhya yogaadi gamyam \* kaaranam tu dhyeyam \* ityaadi   
shruteh jagat kaarana vishesho jijnyaasyah, tena saha jagat   
sambandha prakaara visheshah cha |*** *Mumukshu* who is *kshetrajnya*, as told in *Bhagavad Geetha \(shareera* is told as *kshetra*, and one who knows that is the knower inside that is  [[33]] the *kshetrajnya*\), and one who has become a *mumukshu \(moktum icchuh\)*, desirous of getting liberated from *samsaara *- what is he supposed to know? He has to know the cause of this universe, this is told in *Shruti* itself. From which all these are born, in which all these are existing, and they all go and merge into it - as told in *Taittiriya Upanishad*. The mantra in *Shvetaashvatara Upanishad*, as told in the *Saankhya* and *yoga shaastraas*, all these are *aatma pramaanaani*, they teach about the *aatman, **Naaraayana* is told as the Supreme Deity, everything goes and culminates there, this is the *shaastra* which is told. In *Atharva Shikhopanishad*, it is said ' *Kaaranam tu dhyeyam*'; for the question 'Who should be meditated upon', the answer is that the *jagat kaarana vastu* has to be meditated upon, is told. Because it is taught like this in the *Shrutis*, the *mumukshu **kshetrajnya* has to know the *jagat kaarana vishesha*. One has to also know the relation between the *jagat kaarana vastu* and the *jagat*. 



***Tatra hi shareera shareeri bhaava paryaaye niyaamya niyaamakatva   
lakshane jnyaate jeevasya parasmaat bhedah \* pruthak aatmaanam   
preritaaram cha matvaa \* jnyaa jnyou dvou ajou eesha aneeshou \* nityo   
nityaanaam \* ityaadibhyah shrutibhyah shrooyamaanah svaroopata eva   
iti nischetavyam |*** After understanding the *jagat kaarana vastu*, and the relation between the *jagat kaarana vastu* and the *jagat*, one has to conclude that the difference between *jeevaatman* and *Paramaatman* is real and in essential nature itself. Between *jagat* and *jagat kaarana*, there is *shareera shareeri **bhaava. Jagat* is the *shareera*, and *jagat kaarana vastu, Paramaatman* is the *shareeri. Shareera* is with the three relations - *aadhaara aadheya **bhaava, niyaamaka niyaamya bhaava, shesha sheshi bhaava. **Shareera* is *aadheya, niyaamya*, and *shesha bhoota*, to *shareeri*, who is *aadhaara, niyaamaka, sheshi*. Another way of telling is *niyaamya **niyaamakatva lakshana *- controlled and the Controller. If we know this distinction, we will know the difference between *jeevaatman* and *Paramaatman.* This is told in *Shrutis*, as He is the impeller. Meditating that *jeevaatman* and *Paramaatman* are different, one gets released from this *samsaara*. Two unborn entities, who are *nityaas*, one is *eesha*, ruler, and another is *aneesha*, the ruled; one is the knower, and compared to Him, the other is *ajnya*, ignorant. There is *aatma bahutva*, they are all *nityaas aatmaas*. They are *chetanaas*, they have *jnyaana **aashrayatva*. For all these *chetanaas* who are many and eternal, there is One Eternal *Chetana*, who bestows all their desires; He is the bestower of all the desires. He is the ruler, controller. All these establish the difference  [[34]] between* jeevaatman* and *Paramaatman*. There is difference in *svaroopa*, essential nature itself. This is how it is to be clearly decided. 



***Anyathaa tasya upaadhikatve avidyaa parikalpitatve vaa tayoh   
niyaamya niyaamaka bhaavo na syaat |*** If it not so, if we do not understand it like this, there are two ways to understand this \(i\) *jeeva bhaava* is due to some *upaadhi*, limiting adjunct, then Brahman itself will get *jeeva bhaava*, then *jeeva* is actually not there, \(ii\) it is due to *avidyaa* that *jeeva* is being imagined, Brahman gets covered by *avidyaa*, ignorance, and thinks that he is *jeeva*; there is no possibility of *niyaamya niyaamaka bhaava* in both these cases. 



However, what *shrutis* say is that the *niyaamya niyaamakatva lakshana*, they are distinct and different from each other by essential nature itself. This is told with an example, the same example given by *Bhaashyakaarar* in Sri Bhaashya. 



***Na hi ghata aakaasho mahaa aakaashena niyaamyate |*** *Mahaa aakaasha* is the space existing everywhere. *Ghata aakaasha* is the space existing inside a pot. We make such a distinction because of the limiting adjunct of the pot. If the pot is broken, the *ghata aakaasha* merges into the *mahaa aakaasha*. In this case, if we are talking of *mahaakaasha* and *ghataakaasha* as being different due to *upaadhi* of *ghata*, where is the question of *mahaakaasha* controlling the *ghataakaasha*; the *niyaamya niyaamaka bhaava* does not exist at all. 



***Niyamanam hi vyaapya avasthaanam |*** *Niyamana*, controlling is existing with pervasion. Controller has to pervade what is controlled. 



***Na hi ghata aakaashe mahaa aakaashah tishthati |*** We don't say that the outside *aakaasha, mahaakaasha* exists inside the *ghataakaasha* also, pervading the *ghataakaasha*. So, due to *upaadhi*, we cannot say that they are different in essential nature. 



***Ghate ghata aakaasho mahaa aakaashascha iti aakaasha dvayoh   
upalabdhih syaat |*** If *mahaakaasha* had been controlling *ghataakaasha* by pervasion, then we would have said that there is both *ghataakaasha* and *mahaakaasha* inside the pot. But we do not say like that. So, the difference between *jeevaatman* and *Paramaatman* cannot be due to *upaadhi*, it has to  [[35]] be due to *svaroopa* only; when *niyaamya niyaamaka bhaava* is told very clearly in the *Shruti*, these clearly establish that it is not *oupaadhika*. 



***Avidyaa parikalpitasya na niyamanam sambhavati |*** When we imagine something due to *avidyaa*, there is no question of controlling at all. 



***Na sthaanou parikalpitah chorah kena api niyamyate |*** When we see a pillar and imagine it to be a thief, we cannot control it as there is no thief there. In this case, due to ignorance, if we are imagining a thief in a pillar, it cannot be controlled. 



***Kim cha bhedasya oupaadhikatve kalpitatve vaa brahma vidyayaa tat   
tvam asi iti vaakyaartha jnyaanena vaa upaadhi avidyayoh naashaat   
tat kruta bhedo jeeva shabdaartho nashyet iti mokshasya   
apurushaarthatvaat saadhane na kaschit pravarteta | *** Nobody will put any effort to understand this kind of relationship between *jeevaatman* and *Paramaatman*, where it is imagined due to ignorance, or it is due to limiting adjunct; and by the knowledge of the *vaakya 'Tat tvam asi*', with this statement, *upaadhi* and *avidyaa* will go off; then the *jeeva shabda artha* itself will get destroyed, because there is no more *jeeva* there, there is no *purushaartha* in such a *moksha*, then who will undertake *saadhana*, put any effort for attaining such a *moksha*? Nobody will. 



***Jeevasya anityatve shruti virodhah cha |*** If *jeeva* is going to be stultified, that there is no more *jeeva*, there is no meaning of the *shabda* itself, as *jeeva* does not exist. 



Whereas *Shruti* says that *jeeva* is *nitya*, eternal. 



***Jeeva parayoh sambandhe niyaamya niyantrutva roope mokshasya   
purushaarthataa siddhyati |*** If the relationship between *jeeva* and *Paramaatman* is *niyaamya niyantrutva **sambandha*, then only *moksha* has some meaning, and it becomes *purushaartha*. 



Meaning of *shesha* is *paragata atishaya aadhaanecchayaa upaadeyatvameva **yasya svarupam sah sheshah itarah sheshi.* *Shesha* has to cause *atishaya* to the *sheshi*. When we know that we are subservient to *Bhagavaan*, that our *svaroopa* is to do *atishaya* to *Bhagavaan*, which culminates in *kainkarya*,  [[36]] then it is a *purushaartha*, which we attain according to our real nature. Then *moksha* will be a *purushaartha, purushaih arthyate*, which is sought after by *purushaas*, because it is according to their essential nature. 



***Sa hi sambandhah shesha sheshitva aatmaa |*** This is the relationship of master and subservient one or slave. 



Thus, the *sambandha* is *shesha sheshitva roopa*. The *sambandha* between *jeevaatman* and *Paramaatman* is of the form of *shesha* and *sheshi. Jeevaatman* is subservient to *Paramaatman*, who is the *sheshi*, the master. The relationship is of this form \(master - slave\); by their essential nature, *jeevaatmans* are all subservient to *Paramaatman, **jeevaatmans* are real and many; there is a multitude of *jeevaatmans*; it is not due to some limiting adjunct, *upaadhi*, or *avidyaa. **Jeevaatman* and *Brahman* are different and distinct in their nature, though they are inseparably associated with each other. This is how *shrutis* are propounding these realities. All the *upaayaas* which are prescribed in the *shrutis* to escape from this *samsaara*, all of this will become meaningful. Otherwise, nobody will put any effort to get rid of this *samsaara*, if everything is like a dream, and is not real; it will be against what is told in the *shrutis*. The *sambandha* is *shesha sheshitva aatmaa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's commentary \(continued\)*** 

***Shesha bhootasya jeevasya sheshinam param prati shrooyamaanaa   
samaahitaa eva hi svaroopa anuroopaa kainkarya sampattih, saa eva   
khalu mokshasya kaashthaa |*** Because of this relationship of master and subservient one, the nature of the subservient *jeevaatman*, is according to the nature of subservience itself, it culminates in *kainkarya*; the *shesha* has to bring *atishaya* to *sheshi*; he has to do all kinds of service to the master, this is the essential nature of *jeevaatman*; the service at all times, according to the needs of the master, is in accordance to the very nature of *jeevaatman*. This is ultimate nature of liberation, *moksha*. 



It is sometimes said that doing service to someone is not good, and nobody enjoys it. How can doing service to *Paramaatman* be the ultimate form of  [[37]] liberation? Is it not some kind of bondage? Who wants to be a slave? These kinds of questions are raised and examined in detail in *Vedaartha **Sangraha* and *Sri Bhaashya* by *Bhaashyakaarar*. It is said that in this world, we do not enjoy subservience to others, as it is not according to our nature; it is due to the karma. Whereas in our real nature, we are subservient to only *Paramaatman*; this is the nature of *jeevaatman*; so according to this nature, it will be most enjoyable. If it is against the nature, then only it will not be enjoyable. The kind of subservience we experience in this world is due to karma, and this is why it is not very enjoyable and filled with grief. Whereas if it is according to the nature, it will be most enjoyable. This is *svaroopa anuroopa*. This is said to be the ultimate form of liberation. 



*Sri Engal Aalwaan* explains the *shloka* word by word according to the questions asked by *Maitreyar*. ***Atra jagat kaarana vishesha prashnasya uttaram vishnoh sakaashaat iti   
|*** What is the cause of this universe, the answer being given is that ' *Vishnoh **sakaashaat*'. 



***Sakaashat kaashah - prakaasho jnyaanam |*** *Kaasha* means brilliance or lustre, it means *jnyaanam*. 



***\* Sa aikshata lokaannu srujaa iti, \* tat aikshata bahu syaam \* ityaadi   
ukta sankalpa roopa prakaasha sahitaat iti arthah |*** *Aikshata* means 'He willed', to create the world; *Paramaatman* willed that He become many, this willing is *jnyaana*, this is what is told as *kaasha*; with the *sankalpa roopa jnyaana*, is the meaning. 



 [[38]] ***Athavaa sakaasha shabdah sva roopa vachanah, aachaaryasya   
sakaashaat itiyaadivat |*** Or, it can be taken as *svaroopa* itself; as in from the *aachaarya*, he received something, it is referring to the nature of *svaroopa* itself. 



Both can be told as *Paramaatman* is *nimitta* and *upaadaana kaarana. **Paramaatman's sankalpa* is the *nimitta kaarana*, and *Paramaatman* Himself is the *upaadaana kaarana*. From Vishnu Himself, everything is created; this can be told with respect to *svaroopa* also - this refers to *upaadaana **kaarana*. When it is told with respect to *sankalpa roopa jnyaana*, He is the *nimitta kaarana*. 



***Yathaa babhoova, yathaa bhavishyati iti anayoh api idam eva uttaram   
|*** How was it existing earlier, how is it now, and how is it going to be in future - for all this, the answer is the same that it is from *Paramaatman's* willing that everything is created, or from *Paramaatman* Himself everything is created; this is the answer given. 



***Bhagavatah poorva sarga prakaara krama smruti roopa sankalpena hi   
uttara sarga pravaahah, \* dhaataa yathaa poorvam akalpayat \* iti   
shruteh, \* yatha ruthushu rutulingaani \* iti smruteh cha |*** The way and order in which the earlier creation happened, *Bhagavaan* remembers that and wills to create the world in the same order and same way that it existed earlier; creation and *pralaya* keep happening like a flood, again and again; through His *sankalpa*, He created in the same way. It is told in *Vishnu Puraana* itself, in Chapter 5 of *Amsha* 1 that ' *Yathaa rutushu rutulingaani ... *' the various seasons, coming one after the other in various forms, the same signs are seen again and again; in the same way, in every *yuga*, all the things are getting created in the same way.  [[39]] 



***Leenam aaseet ityaadeh uttaram tatra eva cha sthitam iti |*** The question asked is 'Where did it go and merge', and the answer is that it merged into Vishnu Himself and existed as a part of Vishnu Himself. 



***Upaadaane kaaryasya samsthitih hi layah |*** *Laya* means merging. *Kaarya* is effect and *kaarana* is the cause. When the *kaarya* merges in the *kaarana*, this is called *laya*. The effect goes and merges, and exists in the cause. The effect does not get destroyed, but goes and merges in the cause and exists in the cause. 



When we say that a pot is destroyed, it has got and merged in its cause, which is mud. 



***Sthiti samyama kartaa iti |*** He causes sustenance, and controls it. 



***Sthitih ubhaya vidhaa, \* yena jaataani jeevanti \* iti uktaa praanana   
lakshanaa antaraatmatayaa sthitih ekaa, loka paala soorya soma aadi   
roopena bahih poshakatva aadi roopaa sthitih aparaa |*** There are two types of existence which we see - \(i\) if *Paramaatman* is not existing as the *antaraatman*, the *jeevaatman* cannot live at all; He makes the *jeevaatman* enter into *achetana*, the *deha, indriya*, etc., and He exists as the *antaraatman* of the *jeevaatman*, and *jeevaatman* can live only because of *Paramaatman* existing as *antaraatman*; the beings are all breathing, existing, living because *Paramaatman* exists as *antaraatman; **Paramaatman's* existence as *antaraatman* to *jeevaatman*, and making him exist as *manushya, mruga, pakshi*, etc., is one form of *sthiti*, \(ii\) for the beings to live, there has to be sunlight, moon, etc., the beings get  [[40]] externally nurtured and grow from all these things; if sunlight is not there, things will not grow; this is another way in which *Paramaatman* is the cause of existence as He makes every being live through sub, moon, etc. 



***Agni antaka aadi roopena samhaarah samyamah |*** *Samyama* is taking everything into Himself, destruction, is in two ways \(i\) by Agni, fire which destroys everything, *Paramaatman* exists as *antaraatman* of *Agni*, and \(ii\) *Yama*, death. He only does *samhaara* being their inner self. 



***Tatra bahih sthitih sthiti samyamayoh kartaa iti uktaa, praanana   
lakshanaa sthitih jagat cha sah iti uktaa |*** In the *shloka*, the word *sthiti* refers to *bahih sthiti*, external; *jagat cha **sah* means that He is existing as the inner self of everything in this world. There is nothing which does not have *Paramaatman* as the inner self. Because He is existing as the inner self, all beings are living. 



***Idam eva yanmayam iti asya jagat brahmanoh sambandha prakaara   
vishesha prashnasya api uttaram |*** The question answered was ' *Yanmayama cha jagat brahman*', for that, the answer is also this only. Between *jagat* and *Brahman*, the relationship is also answered in this way. 



***Yat vaa shruti smruti aadibhih niyamanam samyamah, tatra eva cha   
sthitam, sthiti samyamayoh kartaa iti chakaarena svaroopa   
prashnottaram eva |*** *Samyama* can also be told as controlling, through *shruti* and *smrutis*. How does *Paramaatman* control everything in this world? He has given us the *shaastra*, the *shrutis*. He first does the *upadesha* to *Chaturmukha* [[41]] *Brahma*, from whom all the others get it. Various *rishis*, due to their *poorva **karma samskaara*, get the powers to do the *saakshaatkaara* of the *shrutis*, and explain the meanings of the *shrutis* in *smrutis*. Through the *shrutis* and *smrutis*, all the *vidhi* and *nishedha* is told. This is nothing but *Bhagavaan's aajnyaa *- what one should do, and one should not do. This can also be told as *samyama*. The ' *cha' kaara* also says the *svaroopa **prashnottara*, about where everything got merged into - it merged into *Paramaatman* only. He is the *upaadaana kaarana*, everything emerges from Him and goes and merges into Him. Nothing is destroyed completely, but the *kaarya* goes and exists in the *kaarana*. 



*Paramaatman* is the creator of everything, He exists as the *antaraatman* of everything, He is ultimately responsible for the sustenance and withdrawal of everything, and also controlling of everything, He is existing as the inner self of everything, He is the material cause and intelligent cause, He creates all these worlds again and again in the same way as done in the previous creation just like the seasons. *Paramaatman's sankalpa roopa jnyaana* is told as *sakaashaat*. Or the inseparable association, *apruthaksiddha sambandha*, is also in the *svaroopa* itself. *Jagat* is inseparably associated with *Paramaatman*. 



There are two types of *sthitis*, He exists as *antaraatman*, inner self, and is responsible for the living of all the beings; He is also responsible through external entities like sun, moon, to nurture and make all the beings live and grow. In these two ways, He controls the existence and sustenance of all things. He does *samhaara* through *Agni, Antaka*. He controls through *shruti, **smruti*. Everything is existing in Him, and goes and merges in Him, and emerges during *srushti*. This is all told very briefly in one *shloka, shloka* 31. 



With this the first *adhyaaya* comes to a close. 



 [[42]] ***Shreeh ityaadi iti | Sarva puraanaam aadhi bhoote brahma khaanda   
aakhye mahaa puraana udhrutaayaam paaraasharya samhitaayaam iti   
prathamodhyaayah iti anvayah |*** The commentary says that this was taken from *Brahmaanda Puraana*, which was the first *puraana* of all the *puraanaas*, this *Paaraasharya samhitaa* is also taken from there. 





## 32
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 1, Shloka 32: *** ***Mitraaputra vacho nishamya sakalam smrutvaa aatmanah tat varam *** ***Satram cha eva nivaaritam sa sumahaabhaago bhavottaaranam |*** ***Krutvaa vaishnavam uttamam munivaram maitreyam adhyaapayat*** ***Tattva artha pratipaadanam pravadataam sarvaarthadam   
shrunvataam ||*** This summarizes this first chapter. Hearing the words of *Maitreyar*, when he was requesting Paraasharar to teach him everything, he remembered all the previous events, the stopping of the *Satra*, which was started to destroy all the *raakshasaas*, the *vara* he got from *Pulastya*; through this *uttama **Vaishnava Puraana*, which is the means for everyone to get rid of *samsaara*, he taught it to the *muni shrestha Maitreyar*; it has got all the *tattva **arthaas*, and for listeners it gives all kinds of *Purushaarthaas*, benefits. 



***Iti shree vishnu puraane prathame amshe prathamo adhyaayah ||*** 



***Iti shree bhagavad raamaanuja padaabja bhrungaayamaana shree   
vishnu chittaarya virachite vishnu puraana vyaakhyaane shree vishnu   
chitteeye prathame amshe prathamo adhyaayah |*** 



 [[43]] The second chapter starts where Sage *Paraasharar* starts explaining the nature of *Paramaatman*, in a wonderful way. How it is different and distinct from everything, is told. 



***|| Atha dviteeyo adhyaayah ||*** 
