+++
title = "02"

+++


*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 1:*** ***Sri Paraashara uvaacha -*** ***Avikaaraaya shuddhaaya nityaaya paramaatmane |*** ***Sadaika roopa roopaaya vishnave sarva jishnave ||*** He does not have any *vikaara*, He is immutable, does not undergo any change. 



*Paramaatman's svaroopa * is explained wonderfully in the first seven *shlokaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tat evam sankshepatah uktaanaam prati vachanaanaam vivaranatayaa   
avataaryamaanasya puraanasya aarambham avikaaraaya ityaadibhih   
saptabhih \(navabhih\) shlokaih puraana pratipaadya svaabhimata   
devataa namaskaara poorvakam pratijaaneete |*** In the beginning, *Paraasharar * offers obeisance to his *svaabhimata devataa*, the *Paramaatman*, who is his favourite God, and one who is established in the *Puraanaas, Mahaa Vishnu*, whose nature is going to be established in this *puraana*, about whom he is going to teach in detail. Briefly *Paraasharar * told the answers to *Maitreyar's * questions in one *shloka *\( *shloka * 31, of *Amsha * 1, Chapter 1\). Now he is going to explain that in detail. This entire *puraana * is going to explain in detail the answer given by *Paraasharar * very briefly in one *shloka*. He starts the *puraana * with  [[44]] these seven *shlokaas*, starting with *Avikaaraaya*, thereby offering *namaskaara * to his favourite *devataa * and one who is established in this *puraana*. 



***Tatra kaaranatva abhidhaanatah prasaktam vikaaritvam nirasyati -   
avikaaraaya iti |*** The moment something is told to be a cause of something, the cause undergoes a change - we see like this in the world. All causes are assumed to be undergoing some modification. Is *Paramaatman * also like that, is the first question we get. This is refuted in the very first *shloka *- that which is told to be having *kaaranatva*, the change that ensues is being negated. He does not have any vikaara, that is HIS essential nature. 



***Anena achetanaat vyaavruttih |*** By this, *Paramaatman * is different and distinct from the inert. Because all the *achetanaas * undergo change all the time, in *svaroopa * itself. 



*Achetanaa paraarthaa saa nithyaa satata vikriyaa. Achetana * is also eternal, but undergoes change in essential nature all the time. It is *achetanaa*, not *jnyaana aashraya*. It is inert, and does not have knowership. It is *paraarthaa*, exists for something else. *Chetana * uses it for body, *indriyaas*, etc. It is eternal, in *avyakta * form. It is also a reality in our *siddhaanta*, along with *chit * and *eeshvara*. 



Whereas *Paramaatman * is *avikaari*, so *Paramaatman * is distinct and different from *achetana*. 



***\* Na jaayate mriyate vaa ityaadi shruteh kshetrajnyasya api samaanam   
avikaaritvam iti tat vyaavruttim aaha - shuddhaaya iti |***  [[45]] Now, if *Paramaatman * is different from *achetana*, by telling as *avikaari*, even *chetana * is also *avikaari*, as it is told that he is not born, or does not die, does not undergo any change; *jeevaatman * in his essential nature is *jnyaana svaroopa. Kshetrajnya * who is *jeevaatman * is also equally *avikaari*. How is *Paramaatman * different from *jeevaatman? Paramaatman * is *shuddha*. 



***Shuddhih klesha karma aadi raahityam; \* ashuddhaah te samastaastu iti   
hi vakshyate |*** *Jeevaatman * has got *karma, ajnyaana*. These do not exist for *Paramaatman *- this is told as *shuddhaaya*. In *Vishnu Puraana * itself, it is going to be told that *deva, manushya * are *karma yonayah *- born due to karma, and so are all said to be *ashuddha*; they undergo grief, sorrow, sufferings. *Paramaatman * is said to be *shuddha*. 



***Eedrushi shuddhih muktasya api asti iti tat vvyaavruttim aaha -   
nityaaya iti | *** By *shuddhaaya, Paramaatman * is different and distinct from *jeevaatman*, because *jeevaatmans * are all *ashuddhaas*; they are *baddha jeevaas * referred to here. So, *Paramaatman * is different from *baddha jeevaas*. This kind of *shuddhi * is there for *muktaas * also, because they have escaped from *samsaara*, liberated from *samsaara*; the *muktaas * do not have *klesha, **karma*. In order to say that *Paramaatman * is different from *muktaas*, the next word *nityaaya * is told. *Paramaatman * is eternally *shuddha. **Muktaas * were at one point of time *baddhaas * in *samsaara*; and after that got liberated; they are not eternally *shuddhaas*. 



***Shuddhatva akaarena nityaaya |*** *Paramaatman * is eternally *shuddha*. 



 [[46]] ***Avikaaritva shuddhatva nitya shuddhatva aadeeni nitya soorinaam api   
saadhaaranaani iti ata aaha - paramaatmana iti |*** There is one more category of *aatmans*, who are *nityaas*. They are *avikaari, **shuddha*, and also *nitya shuddha*, because they are called *nitya sooris*, eternally not connected with *samsaara*. So, *avikaaraaya, shuddhaaya, **nityaaya *- apply to even *nitya sooris*, so how is *Paramaatman * different. The word *Paramaatman * itself shows that He is different from *nitya sooris * also. 



***Paro yasmaat naasti sah paramah, aparaadheenah; niyantrutayaa   
sarvasya vyaapanaat aatmaa, nitya soorayah tena paravantah |*** There is no one who is superior to *Paramaatman*. He is not under the control of anyone else, whereas *nityaas * are under the control of *Paramaatman*. He pervades everything, being the controller, this is why He is said to be *aatmaa. Nitya sooris * are also controlled by Him. he does not have any other controller. 



***Atah pada chatushtayena pradhaanaadi achetana brahma sanaka aadi   
bhaavanaa yukta kshetrajnya mukta nitya sooribhyoh vyaavruttam   
parama svaroopam shodhitam |*** By these four words - *avikaaraaya, shuddhaaya, nityaaya, paramaatmane *- what is established is that *Paramaatma svaroopa * is different and distinct from \(i\) *pradhaana * and all such *achetanaas \(kaala, mahat, ahamkaara*, etc.\), \(ii\) all the *jeevaatmans \(Brahma, Sanaka*, etc.\) who are all *bhaavanaa **yukta*\*, \(iii\) *mukta*, the liberated souls, \(iv\) *nitya sooris*, the eternal liberated ones. The nature of *Paramaatman * as different and distinct from all these, is established by these four words. 



\* There are three kinds of *bhaavana*, they are *bhaavanaa traya - karma **bhaavanaa, brahma bhaavanaa * and *ubhaya bhaavanaa. Brahmabhaavanaa* is of the form of *upaasanaatmaka jnyaana, karma bhaavana* is *karma anushthaana*. *Sanaka* and other have *brahmabhaavanaa*  [[47]] *Hiranyagarbha* and others have *ubhaya bhaavana* \(some times *karma* and sometimes *brahma bhaavanaa*\). All other *devas* and *manushyas* – have *karma bhaavanaa*. The explanation regarding *mumukshus* \( *manushyas* or *devas*\) – is that they are also having *karma bhaavanaa* only as they think that ‘ *upaasane*’ is being done by them only \( *svakeeyata buddhi*\). Hence it is not considered *brahma bhaavana* \(because *Vishnu **Puraana shlokas* are clearly stating such\). We will come across this in 6th A *msha*. 



***Atha jnyaana shakti aadivat asaadhaaranam tadvat eva sarva   
vilakshanam sva anuroopam jyotirmayam \* aaditya varnam \*   
hiranmayah purusho drushyate \* vidyutah purushaadadhi \* iti upanishat   
siddham svaroopam aaha - sadaika roopa roopaaya iti | *** *Sadaika roopa roopaaya ... * - this part of the *shloka * is establishing the nature of *Paramaatman * which is established in the Upanishads as *jyotirmayam*, incomparable brilliance, lustre - *Aaditya varnam tamasah parastaat *- compared to *Aaditya, Hiranmayah purusho drushyate *- brilliance is compared to that of gold, *Vidyutah purushaadadhi *- lightning, etc - which is befitting His own *svaroopa*, different and distinct from everything else other than Himself, which is extraordinary or unique to *Paramaatman*, just like *jnyaana shakti*, etc. - this form of *Paramaatman * is told as *sadaika roopa **roopaaya*. 



***Prathamo roopa shabdah svabhaava vaachee |*** The first *roopa shabda * is telling about *svabhaava*. Always of the same form, immutable. This is told as *saidaika roopa*. 



***Athavaa sadaika roopam tulya prakaaram, heya pratyaneekatayaa   
kalyaana ekataanatatayaa cha svaroopa tulyam |*** Or *sadaika roopa* can also be interpreted as always of same form of nature - which is opposed to anything defiling, and abode to only all auspicious qualities. In whatever form He exists, these two are are always present. 



 [[48]] ***Dviteeyo roopa shabdo vigraha vaachee |*** The second *roopa shabda* is telling that He has eternal *shubhaashraya, divya **mangala vigraha*. He has a form, an eternal auspicious form, immutable all the time. 



***Atha sarva vyaapti lakshanam aishwaram gunam khyaapayan   
visheshyam nirdishati vishnave iti |*** The word *vishnave* is telling about His quality, of the form of ruling everything, pervading everything, *Bhagavaan * pervading everything controls everything from inside and outside. 



*Aishwara * is about ruling everything. *Eeshitavya * is what is ruled. He is not like the things of this world who can only rule externally. 



*Vishu vyaaptou * is the *dhaatu*. 



***Chit achit vyaaptyaa prasaktam dosham pariharati sarva jishnave iti |*** The moment *vishnave * is said, that He is pervading and controlling everything, all the defects of that *chetana * and *achetana *- do they ensue to *Paramaatman*? This is negated by the word *sarva jishnave*. He is untainted by any of the defects. 



***Jayo hi parasya sva vashe sthaapanam |*** Winning means establishing whatever is won over, establishing it under ones control. Controlling everything, winning over everything is also *svaabhaavika*. 



 [[49]] ***Taaccheelya pratyayena vyaapti jayou svaabhaavikou iti darshayati |*** The word Vishnu, according to *vyaakarana * is told as *Taaccheelya*, means one who pervades everything, it is the nature itself. This becomes *svaabhaavika*. 



Pervading everything and controlling everything - both these are natural to *Paramaatman*. 



*Shloka * 1 is a very important *shloka*, which establishes *Paramaatman's * unique nature and attributes that He is different and distinct from everything else; He controls everything pervading from inside - *antarvyaapti*. He has a *divya **mangala vigraha*, which is most lustrous, unchanging all the time. He is of the nature of being opposed to anything defiling, being abode to only auspicious qualities. This establishes the nature of Brahman in the most wonderful way. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 2:*** ***Namo hiranya garbhaaya haraye shankaraaya cha |*** ***Vaasudevaaya taaraaya sarga sthiti antakaarine ||*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 3:*** ***Eka aneka svaroopaaya sthoola sookshma aatmane namah |*** ***Avyakta vyakta roopaaya vishnave mukti hetave ||*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 4:*** ***Sarga sthiti vinaashaanaam jagato yo jaganmayah |***  [[50]] ***Moola bhooto namah tasmai vishnave paramaatmahe ||*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 5:*** ***Aadhaara bhootam vishvasya api aneeyaamsam aneeyasaam |*** ***Pranamya sarva bhootastham achytam purushottamam ||*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 6:*** ***Jnyaana svaroopam atyantam nirmalam paramaarthatah |*** ***Tam eva artha svaroopena bhraanti darshanatah sthitam ||*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 7:*** ***Vishnum grasishnum vishvasya sthitou sarge tathaa prabhum |*** ***Pranamya jagataam eesham ajam aksharam avyayam ||*** 



*Paramaatman's svaroopa* is taught up to these seven *shlokaas*. 



***Question***: Why *Bhagavaan * wanted to create? *Answer*: This is also asked in the *Brahma Sutras*. The answer given by *Baadaraayana * is ***Lokavat tu leelaa kaivalyam***. It is His sport. Someone has grief, someone has happiness. Someone is enjoying, someone is suffering. Someone has knowledge, someone has ignorance. Why should *Paramaatman* create all this? It is said to be His sport. He is impartial. He does not have *vaishamya * and *nairghrunya*. He does not want someone to suffer. He does not have impartiality or cruelty. The suffering happens because of *chetana's karma*; they have to experience the results of that; if they do not experience, there will be *dosha * of partiality on the part  [[51]] of *Paramaatman*. A king, if he does not punish a criminal, will become partial; he has to enforce the law. *Leelaa * is sport for Him, and is ultimately *dayaa*, because He wants *jeevaatmans * to liberate themselves from *samsaara*. He gives them the mind, thinking power, *kriyaa shakti, chit **shakti*, shows the *aachaaryaas*, teaches the *shaastra*, makes one to go in the right way, and they have to uplift themselves; if they don't do, they have to suffer the *karma*. 



We had studied the *Shloka * 1, of *Amsha * 1, Chapter 2, where the *Paramaatma **svaroopa * is established wonderfully, where He is different and distinct from everything else - *achetana, baddha, mukta * and *nitya*. Being the *antaryaami * of everything, He is the inner controller. He has a wonderful divine auspicious form, which is also eternal, and He pervades everything and rules over everything. All of this was established with various *Shruti * and *Smruti pramaanaas*. 



Continuing further, *Bhagavat svaroopa * is established again, in various ways. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 2:*** ***Namo hiranya garbhaaya haraye shankaraaya cha |*** ***Vaasudevaaya taaraaya sarga sthiti antakaarine ||*** I offer *pramaanams* to *Hiranya Garbha, Hari * and *Shankara*, and also *Vaasudeva*, who makes everyone cross over *samsaara * and is the cause of creation, sustenance and *pralaya *\(dissolution\). 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary*** While *Bhagavat svaroopa * is being established, everything is directed towards *Bhagavaan*. But here, we see *namaskaarams * being done to *Hiranya * [[52]] *Garbha * and *Shankara*. What is its meaning? How is *Bhagavat svaroopa* known from this? This is explained in the *vyaakhyaana*. ***Brahma shivayoh tat vibhootitvam aaha - namo hiranyagarbhaaya iti |*** The aspect that *Chaturmukha Brahma * and *Rudra * are also *vibhooti * of *Paramaatman, \(vibhooti * means *aishwarya, **Bhagavaan's * glory, being ruled over by him\) - this is told by *Namo Hiranya **Garbhaaya iti*. 



***Sva avataara chaturmukha rudra roopena hi srushti aadi kartrutvam |*** *Brahma, Vishnu* and *Maheshwara*, who are the three *devataas*, responsible for *srushti, sthiti * and *pralaya; sva avataara * is *Bhagavaan's * own *avataara*, along with *Brahma * and *Rudra *- in these three forms; He being the *antaryaami * of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, makes him do the creation; being the *antaryaami * of *Rudra*, He does dissolution in the form of *Rudra*; and *Vishnu * is His own *avataara*, He Himself stays as *Hari*; in the forms of *Chaturmukha Brahma * and *Rudra*, He does *srushti * and *pralaya * being their *antaryaami*. 



***Taaraaya - samsaara uttaarakaaya, moksha pradaaya |*** One who makes everyone cross over *samsaara*, and in getting liberated from *samsaara*. 



***Vaasudevaaya - vaasudeva roopena moksha pradatvam |*** *Vaasudeva * is *Para Vaasudeva; Bhagavaan * is present as *Para **Vaasudeva * in *Parama Padam; moksha pradatva* is told for Him. 



***Hari shabde satyapi vaasudeva shabdo hareh avataaratva   
jnyaapanaarthah |***  [[53]] When *Hari * is already told, why is *Vaasudeva * being told again; *Hari * is *avataara * of *Paramaatman * only; *Para Vaasudeva * Himself incarnates or manifests as *Hari*, to give equal status to *Brahma * and *Shiva * in *srushti * and *pralaya*, as they are His own *vibhootis*; He only has given them the powers to do the powers; He stays with them to give them the status. 



***\* Tam eva viditvaa atimrutyumeti naanyah panthaa vidyate ayanaaya,   
\* maam eva ye prapadyante maayaam etaam taranti te \(Bhagavad   
Geetha\), \* samsaara paaram param eepsamaanaih aaraadhaneeyo hari   
eka eva, \* ... *** The *pramaanaas * establish that *Vaasudeva * is only the one who can bestow *moksha, atimrutyumeti * is told as *mrutyum atyeti*; meditating on *Paramaatman * only, doing *upaasana * on *Paramaatman * only, one can cross over *mrutyu, samsaara*, there is no other way to cross over this; in order to cross over this *prakruti*, one has to surrender only unto *Paramaatman*; for those who want to reach the other end of *samsaara*, only *Hari * is to be worshipped. 



***... Brahmaanam shitikantham cha yaah cha anyaa devataah smrutaah |   
Pratibuddhaa na sevante yasmaat parimitam phalam | ... *** Those who are desirous of attaining *moksha*, they are called *pratibuddhaas*; they do not worship or surrender unto *Chaturmukha Brahma, Rudra * or any other *devataa * who is told like *Varuna*, Indra, etc. The reason is that the benefits gained by worshipping those deities is very limited as they are all in the *prakruti mandala * only; and whatever they can give is limited to their capacities, as they are *kshetrajnyaas * only; none of them can give *moksha*. 



***\* Antavat tu phalam teshaam \* ityaadibhih bhagavata eva moksha   
pradatvam uktam |***  [[54]] Those who worship other deities, their fruits have and end, their benefits end at some point of time; it is not *ananta phala*, but *antavat phala*; only *Bhagavaan * can bestow fruits which are *ananta*; all these *pramaanaas * establish that *moksha pradatva * is only for *Bhagavaan*. 



***Atra hiranyagarbha aadivat hareh na vibhootitvam, \* na hi paalana   
samarthyam rute sarveshvaram harim \* ityaadinaa tasya   
sarveshvaratvasya uktatvaat |*** Here the *vibhootitva * is only for *Hiranya Garbha * and *Shiva*, and not for *Hari*; other than *Hari*, there is no other *Sarveshvara*, no one else can rule over or control, that capacity is not there for everyone else; He has been told to be *Sarveshvara*; He is not part of the *vibhootis*. 



*Shloka * 2 establishes the offering of *pranaamams * to *Bhagavaan*, who is in the form of *Hari * Himself, and His *vibhootis*, who are *Chaturmukha **Brahma * and *Rudra*, He being their *antaryaami*, does all their works, and *Vaasudeva * who bestows *moksha*, and is the cause of *srushti, **sthiti * and *laya*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 3:*** ***Eka aneka svaroopaaya sthoola sookshma aatmane namah |*** ***Avyakta vyakta roopaaya vishnave mukti hetave ||*** He is one also, and many also. He is also subtle, and expressed in the gross form. I offer *pranaamams * to Him. He is also in the unmanifested state and manifest state. He is the cause of *moksha, Vishnu*, who is the all pervading *Paramaatman*. I offer my obeisance. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Avyakta vyaktayoh api tat roopatvam aaha eka aneka iti | ***  [[55]] *Avyakta * is the unmanifest, which are in the *sookshma roopa*, subtle form; and *vyakta * is the manifest, which are in the *sthoola roopa*. 



This is how the *anvaya * has to be done. ***Kaarana dashaayaam eka sookshma avyaktatva aadeeni kaarya   
dashaayaam aneka sthoola vyaktatva aadeeni vishnave tat vyaapine |*** In this, *eka, sookshma * and *avyakta *\(He is One, subtle and unmanifest\) have to be grouped together and are in the causal state, and *aneka, sthoola, **vyakta *\(He becomes many, in the gross form, and manifest\) have to be grouped together and are in the state of effect. One who pervades in the causal state and state of effect, is *Vishnu*. 



***Ubhaya avastha prakruteh mukti hetave sva vasha vartitvaat tat mukti   
hetave |*** He is the cause of *mukti * in both the states, because everything is under His control, and everything acts being under His control only. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 4:*** ***Sarga sthiti vinaashaanaam jagato yo jaganmayah |*** ***Moola bhooto namah tasmai vishnave paramaatmane ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Achit prasangaat kaala roopatvam aaha - sarga sthiti iti |*** Here, *kaala svaroopa * is being told, *Bhagavaan * being of the *svaroopa * of *kaala*. 



 [[56]] ***Jagat sarga aadi moola bhooto hi kaalah, \* na kaalena vinaa srushti   
nishpaadakrut bhavet \* ityaadeh |*** *Kaala* is the cause of *srushti, sthiti, laya*. Everything is referred with respect to time. Time is always known with respect to objects. An object comes into existence at some time, it stays for some time, undergoes change, and gets destroyed at some point of time. For all these, *kaala* is said to be the root cause. Without *kaala*, *Brahma * cannot create, because creation is done at a particular time. 



***Jaganmayah - unmesha nimesha kalaa unmaana soorya gamana aadinaa   
padaartha avacchedaka svaroopah |*** Here, *Bhagavat svaroopa * is told in the form of *kaala * itself. Time can be felt in aspects such as opening the eyes, closing the eyes, divisions of time like *kalaa muhoortha kaashthaa paksha maasa samvatsara*, a particular measure called *unmaana*, movement of the Sun in the morning, afternoon, evening - everything is bound by time, and *Paramaatman * only is told as that *svaroopa*. He binds everything with respect to time. He is only responsible for the rising of the Sun at a particular time. 



***Paramaatmane - akaala vashyaaya |*** *Paramaatman* is not controlled by time. *Kaala * is under the control of *Paramaatman*. 



***\* Kaalah pachati bhootaani sarvaani eva sahaatmanaa | Kaalah pakvo   
yamanveti yastam veda sa vedavit ||*** Time cooks everybody. *Kaala* itself will get cooked by *Paramaatman*. Whoever knows this is said to be *Vedavit*. 



 [[57]] ***\* Kaala muhoortaadi mayah cha kaalo na yad vibhooteh parinaama   
hetuh \* ityaadi |*** *Paramaatman's nitya vibhooti * does not undergo any change. *Kaala * is having divisions of *kalaa, muhoortha, kaashtha*, etc., and is not the cause of *parinaama * of *Paramaatman's vibhooti*. In *Paramapada*, *kaala * does not control anything; everything is eternal there, and there is no change; *kaala * exists but does not control anything in *Paramapada*. In *prakruti mandala, kaala * controls everything. Even *Brahma's * time is limited by a particular number of *kalpaas*. 



*Shloka * 4 tells about the *kaala svaroopatva * of *Paramaatman*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 5:*** ***Aadhaara bhootam vishvasya api aneeyaamsam aneeyasaam |*** ***Pranamya sarva bhootastham achyutam purushottamam ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Samasthi kshetrajnya roopatvam aaha - aadhaara bhootam iti |*** The collectivity of all the *chetanaas, * souls, sentients - during *pralaya*, everything gets merged, and all *chetanaas * will be together - the *Paramaatman * who has all of this as His body, He has control over everything, and is the support of everything. 



***Vishvasya prakruti parinaamasya jeeva karma nimittatvena tat   
shareeratayaa tat aadhaaratvam |*** The *prakruti parinaama * is due to the *jeeva karmaas. Prakruti * is the *shareera * for *jeevaas*, and because of *jeeva karmaas, prakruti * gets  [[58]] modified into *deha, indriyaas*, etc., and is under the control of *jeevaatman*. 



***\* Bhrutamaatraah prajnyaa maatraasu arpitaah \(Koushitaki Upanishad\)   
\* yayaa idam dhaaryate jagat \* ityaadi |*** *Pancha bhootaas * are controlled by *jeevaatman*, and *jeevaatman * is controlled by *praana shabda nirdishta Paramaatman; prakruti * is supported by *jeevaatman, jeevaatman * is supported by *Paramaatman*. 



***Aneeyaamsam aneeyasaam prakruteh ati sookshma avasthaa   
visheshaanaam api vyaaptyaa tato api sookshmataram |*** *Jeevaatmans * are also *sookshma * compared to *prakruti*, and they pervade the *prakruti*. 



***\* Avyaktam akshare leeyate \* ityaadi |*** *Avyakta * is *prakruti * in unmanifest state, it merges with *akshara*, which is the *samashti jeevaatmans*. This goes and merges into *Paramaatman*. 



***Sarva bhootastham sarva bhooteshu aatmatayaa avasthitam |*** Existing as the inner self in all the *bhootaas*. 



***Achyutam - tat vikaara rahitam |*** *Prakruti vikaaraas* do not affect the *chetanaas*. 



***Evam roopa samashti purusha shareeram purushottamam pranamya   
kathayaami iti anvayah |***  [[59]] The *anvaya* is: All these are ultimately pertaining to *Paramaatma **svaroopa * only, the *Paramaatman * who has all these as the *shareera*, the *achetana * as *shareera, kaala * as *shareera, samashti **kshetrajnyaas * as *shareera*, and who controls all these being the inner controller of these, who pervades everything. One who has this kind of *samashti kshetrajnyaas * as His body, to one who is *aadheya, **niyaamya * and *shesha bhoota*; I do *pranaama * to that *Purushottama*, and tell this. 



This is directly told with *saamaanaadhikaranya*, that *sarva bhootastham **purushottamam, aneeyaamsam aneeyasaam purushottamam *- the *Purushottama * who has all these things as the body. 



***Yat vaa sarva bhootastham sarva aatmasu sthitam |*** Or *sarva bhootastham * can be taken as one who is existing in all the *aatmaas * also. Or it can be told as *jeevaatmans * who are existing in all the bodies, and *Paramaatman*, who is the controller of all these *jeevaatmans*. 



***Achyutam jeeva gata jnyaana sankocha aadi rahitam |*** When *sarva bhootastham * is taken as *Paramaatman * directly, *Achyutam * is taken as one who is *vikaara rahita*; the ups and downs in *dharma bhoota **jnyaana * is not present in *Paramaatman*. When taken with respect to *samashti kshetrajnyaas, Achyutam * is taken as *kshetrjnyaas * who do not have the *vikaara * of *prakruti * which undergoes modifications in its *svaroopa. **Jeevaatmans * undergo *jnyaana sankocha * in their *dharma bhoota jnyaana*, due to their *karma*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 6:***  [[60]] ***Jnyaana svaroopam atyanta nirmalam paramaarthatah |*** ***Tam eva artha svaroopena bhraanti darshanatah sthitam ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Vyashti roopam aaha - jnyaana svaroopam iti |*** After telling about the *samashti roopa * of *Paramaatman*, which is the *shareera * of *Paramaatman*, now the *vyashti roopa * is being told. *Vyashti **roopa * is that which is manifested, in the gross state. *Samashti * is the unmanifested state, *avyakta*, before the *pancheekarana*. After *pancheekarana*, whatever happens is called *vyashti srushti *- here name and form divisions happen, *naama roopa vibhaaga*. 



***Vastu vruttiyaa aparicchinna anukoola jnyaanaika svaroopam |*** It is not limited by any object, and it has got unlimited *anukoola*, and *jnyaana aananda svaroopa*. 



***Atyanta nirmalam sarvathaa mala roopa dukha ajnyaana aadi rahitam;   
tam eva bhraanti darshanatah anaatmani aatma vijnyaanaat artha   
svaroopena drushya svaroopena sthitam |*** There is no defect, there is no grief, ignorance. *Bhraanti * is *anaatmani **aatma vijnyaanaat*, having an idea of *aatman* in that which is not the *aatman. Drushya svaroopa * is that which can be perceived with our eyes. 



***Yat vaa deva manushyaadi tat tat aakaara vishishta pinda   
maatratayaa pratibhaasamaanam |*** In the *vyashti roopa*, the *chetanaas * and *Paramaatman * are existing in the forms of *deva, manushya*; and in all these forms, a *jeevaatman * is existing;  [[61]] we see the body itself as the *jeevaatman*; actually, it is the *deha vishishta **jeevatma vishishta Paramaatman * who is there; that which is perceived by the eyes in the form of *deva, manushya*, etc., He appears in that form alone. Inside the body, there is subtle *jeevaatman*, and this body and *jeevaatman * are the *shareera * of *Paramaatman. Paramaatman * Himself exists in this *vyashti roopa*. 



In reality, He is without any defect, He is *jnyaana aananda svaroopa*; and Him only the people perceive wrongly, in this *vyashti * form. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 7:*** ***Vishnum grasishnum vishvasya sthitou sarge tathaa prabhum |*** ***Pranamya jagataam eesham ajam aksharam avyayam ||*** One who withdraws unto Himself, He is only responsible for creation and sustenance of the world. Having offered my *pranaamams * to such Vishnu, who is of the nature of *avikaaraaya shuddhaaya*, etc., He does creation, dissolution through Brahma, Shiva, He has everything as His body, *kaala, **samashti kshetrajnyaas*, He is in the *vyashti * form also, He is the controller and pervades everything, He exists as everything, I offer my *pranaamams*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Uktam artham upasamharati - vishnum iti |*** All these things which were established is being concluded here. 



***Prabhum srushti aadishu nairapekshyena svacchandam |*** He, by Himself, can independently do creation, etc., without any expectation. He Himself is everything - the *upaadaana kaarana, nimitta **kaarana*, and *sahakaari kaarana*.  [[62]] 



***Ajam aksharam - karma adheena janma naasha rahitam |*** He does not have birth and death due to *karma*. 



***Avyayam - poorvoktam mahaa vibhooteh aprachyutam |*** He has everything as *mahaa vibhooti*, that is His nature. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 8:*** ***Kathayaami yathaa poorvam dakshaadyaih munisattamaih |*** ***Prushtah provaacha bhagavaan abjayonih pitaamahah ||*** Having offered my *pranaamams * to *Paramaatman * of this wonderful nature, I will start teaching you the details as I heard. *Daksha * and all these sages, long back, told this. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 9:*** ***Taih cha uktam purukutsaatha bhoobhuje narmadaa tate |*** ***Saarasvataaya tena api mahyam saarasvatena cha ||*** *Daksha * and others who listened to *Chaturmukha Brahma*, and got the *upadesha * from him, they told *Purukutsa*, who was a king on the banks of the Narmada river; *Purukutsa * taught it to *Saarasvata*, and *Saarasvata * taught me. 



The *paramparaa * comes like this - *Chaturmukha Brahma, Daksha * and other *rishis, Purukutsa, Saarasvata, Paraasharar*. This is the *sampradaaya*, and is most reliable and most authentic. 



 [[63]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Atha shrotrunaam aadaraartham svasya aaptatama guru parva kramam   
aaha - kathayaami iti dvaabhyaam |*** In two *shlokaas, Paraasharar * says, in order to make the listeners get belief in that, and have faith in what he is going to tell, the order, the *guru* *shishya paramparaa*, the *sampradaaya*, how he actually acquired this knowledge which he is going to teach, that he is establishing here in two shlokaas. 



***Bhagavaan utpatti pralayaadi tattvajnyah, \* Utpattim cha vinaasham   
cha bhootaanaam aagatim gatim | Vetti vidyaam avidyaam cha sa   
vaachyo bhagavaan iti \* iti vachanaat |*** *Bhagavaan* is one who knows the *utpatti * and *vinaasha * of the beings, where do they go, how do they come, how are they born, which *yonis * they take, what *janmaas * they take, what is *vidyaa*, what is *avidyaa*. 



***Kutah? Abjayonih yato bhagavat aurasah tat shishyah cha |*** Why? Because He is said to be *abjayoni; **Paramaatman * does *upadesha * of *Veda * to *Chaturmukha Brahma*, and so *Chaturmukha Brahma * becomes the first student of *Paramaatman; **Chaturmukha Brahma * is also created by *Paramaatman*, and is also the son of *Paramaatman*. So, he is also told to be *Bhagavaan*. 



***\* Yo brahmaanam vidadhaati poorvam yo vai vedaamscha prahinoti   
tasmai \* iti shruteh |*** He creates *Chaturmukha Brahma*, and also gives him the *Vedaas*, is what the *shruti * says. 





 [[64]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 10:*** ***Parah paraanaam paramah paramaatmaa aatma samsthitah |*** ***Roopa varna aadi nirdesha visheshana vivarjitah ||*** 



These *shlokaas * are referred to by *Bhaashyakaarar * in *Vedaartha Sangraha, **Sri Bhaashya*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Atha vistarena puraanam vaktum aarabhate parah paraanaam iti |*** Now, *Paraasharar * starts the teach the *puraana * in detail. 



***Parah paraanaam svaroopa roopa guna aishwarya aadibhih   
utkrushtebhyo api urkrushtah |*** In *svaroopa, guna, aishwarya*, He is supreme and superior to even those who are exalted. 



***Paramah svasmaat para rahitah |*** There is no one who is superior to Him. 



***Paramaatmaa - aapnoti iti aatmaa svayam aatmaantara rahitah cha |*** One who controls everything, supports everything, one who rules over everything. He is *aadhaara, niyaamaka * and *sheshi*. Everything else is *aadheya * to Him, everything is *niyaamya*, and *shesha bhoota * to Him. He does not have any other person who rules over Him. 



 [[65]] ***Aatma samsthitah sva aadhaarah | *** He is the support of Himself. 



***Roopam samsthaanam deva aadi jaatih varnah shukla aadih |*** *Roopa * is the *samsthaana*, the classes told as *deva, manushya*, etc., *varnaas * are the colours. 



***Aadi shabdena kriyaa dravye grahyete |*** *Kriya* and *dravya * like *danda, kundala*, are told. 



***Nirdeshah sanjyaa |*** He cannot be called with a particular colour or class because He can take any form He wants. It is not decided like the *baddha chetanaas*. 



***Etaih jaati guna kriyaa dravya naamaakhyaih kalpanaa hetubhih   
visheshanaih vivarjitah |*** We cannot imagine Him to be only of a particular colour or *jaati * or *dravya*. 



***Roopa vargeti paathe vargo jaatih |*** There is a *paathaantara, roopa varga*, here *varga * means *jaati*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 11:*** ***Apakshaya vinaashaabhyaam parinaam vruddhi janmabhih |*** ***Varjitah shakyate vaktum yah sadaa asti iti kevalam ||***  [[66]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Shadbhih bhaava vikaaraih varjitah iti aaha - apekshaya ityadinaa -   
apakshaya iti |*** There are six *bhaava vikaaraas * which all beings undergo - *asti, jaayate, **vivardhate, viparinamate, apaksheeyate, nashyati*. Here, *apakshaya * is *apaksheeyate, vinaasha * is *nashyati, **parinaama * is *viparinamate, vruddhi * is *vardhate, **jamabhih * include *asti * and *jaayate*. He is without any of these *bhaava **vikaaraas*. 



We cannot tell Him through *roopa, varna*. We cannot also tell Him with the six *bhaava vikaaraas*. How can we ever address Him. Is it possible to tell Him? 



***Sadaa asti iti vachanaat kadaachitka astitva vikaaro nirastah |*** Most objects we say that they exist at a particular point of time. This cannot be told so for *Paramaatman*. 



***Etat sattayaa anabhivyaaptasya kaalasya abhaavaat |*** For *Chaturmukha Brahma*, he does not exist after 100 years, but time exists after that also, but he does not exist. In a like manner, all objects exist at a particular point of time and do not exist beyond some point of time. Time exists all the time, but objects do not exist all the time. However, for *Paramaatman*, there is no time at which He does not exist. He exists all the time. 



***Anena kaala anavacchedah uktah |***  [[67]] He is not limited by time. This is told here. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 12:*** ***Sarvatra asou samastam cha vasati atra iti vai yatah |*** ***Tatah sa vaasudeva iti vidvatbhih paripathyate ||*** He exists in all the places, and everything exists in Him. he is told as *Vaasudeva*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Desha anavacchedam naama vishesha nirvachanena darshayati sarvatra   
iti |*** He is not bound by a particular place. This is told by telling the specific name of *Paramaatman * as *Vaasudeva*. 



***\* Nainam oordhvam na tiryancham na madhye parijaghrabhat \*   
antarbahih cha tat sarvam vyaapya naaraayanah sthitah \* ityaadeh   
samastam atra vasati; jaati guna prabaadivat tat adheena dhaaranam   
bhavati \* bhartaa san mriyamaano bibharti \(Taittiriya Aaranyaka\) \* iti   
shruteh |*** Nobody can grasp Him anywhere, He exists pervading everything inside and outside. *Samastam atra vasati, sarvatra asou vasati*. How can everything exist in Him? How are they all supported by Him. This is just like *jaati, guna*, as sunlight is supported by Sun, as *jaati *- cowness is supported in a cow; in the same way, *Paramaatman * supports everything, and everything is dependent on Him. He supports everything, is told. 



***Agni jala aadibhih nabha iva sarva gato api tadgata doshaih   
asamsprushto dyotate iti aaha - deva iti |***  [[68]] *Vaasudeva - vaasu * means *vasati samastam atra, sarvatra asou vasati; **devah * means *dyotate *- He shines forth. He shines forth untouched by any defects, He is existing everywhere. Just like space pervades everything, He pervades water, fire, everything. The defects of water, fire, space do not touch space. In the same way, *Paramaatman * pervades everything, untouched by the defects of all the objects. He shines forth like that. 



*Bhagavad svaroopa * is being explained in a most wonderful way by *Paraasharar*. All the *achetanaas*, and *samashti kshetrajnyaas * which are seen here, all *drushya padaarthaas*, and *kaala*, are *Brahman * only, are all *shareera * of *Parabrahman. Paramaatma svaroopa * is told in terms of all the *tattvaas*, and the nature of these *tattvaas * are also explained. These are controlled by *Paramaatman*, and He is the *antaryaami * of everything, everything being His *prakaara*, His mode, being His *shareera*. He is only existing as everything. This is what we see in the *Shrutis*. 



*Paramaatman*, is *Vaasudeva*, the *devataa vishesha. Vyutpatti * of the word *Vaasudeva * is *vaasuh cha asou devah cha, vasati sarvatra, sarvatra asou **samastam cha vasati atra iti vai yatah, tatah sa vaasudeva iti vidvadbhih **paripathyate*. Everything is residing in Him, and He resides in everything. He shines forth, and He is *deva. Deva * is *dyotate*, He has got most wonderful lustre; Sun and moon which have brightness are all possible to have that because of *Paramaatman * only. *Na tatra sooryo bhaati na chandra taarakam, **nema vidyuto bhaanti kuto ayam agnih, tam eva bhaantam anubhaati **sarvam yasya bhaasaa sarvam idam bibhaati*, is told in *Kathopanishad*. Only because of His brilliance, everything else shines forth. He is *Vaasudeva*, the *devataa vishesha*, the Supreme Brahman, He is without any *shat bhaava **vikaara*, He is *ekaroopa * all the time, He has a *divya mangala vigraha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 13:*** ***Tat brahma paramam nityam ajam akshayam avyayam |***  [[69]] ***Eka svaroopam tu sadaa heya abhaavaat cha nirmalam ||*** He is *Brahman*, eternal, unborn, does not undergo change, no change in state, 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Esha eva vedaanta vedyam brahma iti aaha - tat brahma iti |*** *Vaasudeva * who pervades everything, and everything is residing in Him. As established in the *Shrutis, antar bahih cha yat sarvam vyaapya naaraayanah **sthitah*. He is known from *Vedaanta*, the Upanishads establish His *svaroopa * most wonderfully. 



***Akshayam apakshaya rahitam |*** He doesn't undergo any change. 



*Kshaya * is getting deteriorated, and that is not there for *Vaasudeva*. 



***Avyayam parinaama vivruddhyakhya avasthaantara rahitam |*** He is not undergoing different states like *parinaama, vivruddi*. There is no question of growing like what we see in the *baddha jeevaas*. 



***Atah eka svaroopam |*** Because of this, He is all the time of the same nature, unchanging immutable nature. 



 [[70]] ***Heyam avidyaa asmita aadi tat phalam malam; yathaa uktam \* kaamah   
krodhaha cha mohah cha harsho maano mado matih | Vishaadah cha   
ashtamah proktah iti ete maanasaah malaah \* iti |*** There are defects like *avidyaa, asmitaa, raaga, dvesha, abhinivesha*. He is without any of those defects. The eight defects of the mind, which make it impure, are told - *kaama, krodha, moha, harsha, maana, mada, mati, **vishaada. Mati * means desire. These defects do not exist in *Paramaatman*. 



Five *pancha kleshaas * are told in *Yoga Sutra. Asmitaa * is thinking of *chitta, **antahkarana*, ego as *aatman. Pancha kleshaas * come due to *karma*. 



In *mukta aatmaas * also, at one time they were associated with *heya*, these kind of defects; after that they got released from that. *Heya abhaavaat **nirmalam * differentiates Him from *baddha jeevaas. Sadaa heya abhaavaat **cha nirmalam * differentiates Hims from *muktaas* also. 



***Gunaah sattva aadayah |*** *Gunaas * are *sattva * and others. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 14:*** ***Tat eva sarvam eva etat vyakta avyakta svaroopavat |*** ***Tathaa purusha roopena kaala roopena cha sthitam ||*** All these things are that *Brahman * only. Four entities are told here -*vyakta *\(when *prakruti * is differentiated into name and form, and is visible, what is manifested\), *avyakta *\(unmanifest state of *prakruti*\), *purusha *\(all the *chetanaas*\) and *kaala*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[71]] ***Vastutah anavacchedam aaha - tat eva iti |*** He is not controlled or bound by anything. He is present in all objects - it cannot be said that He is present in one object and not present in another object. He is present in every object at all times in all places. 



***Vyakta avyakta svaroopavat etat sarvam tat eva brahma; tathaa tat   
eva samashti vyashti purusha roopena kaala roopena cha sthitam |*** Whatever we see in the manifest or unmanifest state are Brahman only. *Chetanaas * are also existing in two forms - *samashti *\(collectivity of all sentient beings during *pralaya *- it called *akshara*\); in the *vyakta * state, each sentient enters into a body, this is called *vyashti; kaala * is also *Paramaatman*, being under the control of *Paramaatman*. 



*Avyakam akshare leeyate, aksharam tamasi leeyate. * 



***Chit achit prakaarasya brahmana eva vastutvaat vastu antara   
paricchedah |*** If something has to be called as a *vastu, Brahman * has to do *antah pravesha, **anu pravesha*, name and form have to come into existence; *Paramaatman * makes the *jeeva * enter, and He enters along with him. *Paramaatman * associates *jeeva * with *deha, indriya*, and gives him the *jnyaana. Chetanaas * during *pralaya*, have no knowledge, and are just lying down just like *achetanaas*. During *pralaya*, everything merges into *Paramaatman*. During *srushti*, He makes each *jeevaatman * enter a body based on the *karmaas*, and gives them the awareness, the *dharma bhoota **jnyaana * which is there all the time. He gives the *chetanaas * an opportunity to act, think, understand, and uplift themselves. If *Paramaatman * does not enter, and does not do *anupravesha*, does not do differentiation into name and form, there will be no *vastu * at all. If something has to be called as a *vastu*, it is only because *Paramaatmans * existing as its *antaryaami*, by *anupravesha*, everything existing as His mode, as His *shareera*.  [[72]] Everything is His *prakaara*, mode, and He is the *prakaari. **Chit * and *achit * both are His modes. Every name and form denotes *Paramaatman * in the ultimate sense - this is called *aparyavasaana **vrutti*. Why we don't feel like this, is because of our lack of knowledge, we limit the connotation of name and form to that *chetana * only. We don't experience the depth of the complete connotation of the words. All the *chetanaas * in *samashti, vyashti * or in any state, are all modes of *Paramaatman*, and become *vastu * because of *Paramaatman * only. There can be no object which is without *Paramaatman*. There is no object in which *Paramaatman * does not exist. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 15:*** ***Parasya brahmano roopam purushah prathamam dvija |*** ***Vyakta avyakte tathaa eva anye roope kaalah tathaa aparam ||*** Four things are told - *purusha, vyakta, avyakta, kaala*. All these are said to be *Brahmanah roopam*. 



This is a very important *shloka * for our *siddhaanta*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Heya pratyaneeka kalyaana guna aashrayasya brahmanah vikaara   
apurushaartha aadi dosha aashraya sarva taadaatmye tat gataa   
doshaah prasajnyeran nityaashankya \* yasya aatmaa shareeram \*   
ityaadi shruti siddha shareera aatma bhaavena taadaatmyam na tu   
svaroopena iti aaha parasya iti |*** The *taadaatmya*, that *Paramaatman * is existing in everything as *antaryaami*; everything is *Brahman, sarvam khalvidam brahma*, everything is a mode of *Paramaatman*, being His *shareera*; this identity, oneness, *taadaatmya*, is it by *svaroopa * itself, or through *shareera aatma bhaava *- is what we have to  [[73]] understand. It is not in the *svaroopa*. If it was *svaroopa*, only one will exist, and second one cannot exist. *Taadaatmya * is not by *svaroopa * but through *shareera aatma bhaava. **Chetana * and *achetana * exist, *Paramaatman * also exists; they both exist inseparably all the time, *Paramaatman * being the controller and support all the time, *chetanaas * and *achetanaas * being the controlled and supported, they are independent entities always associated with *Paramaatman* inseparably; without *Paramaatman * being there, they cannot even exist; their *sthiti, pravrutti * is controlled by *Paramaatman*. This existence of *Paramaatman * in all these forms - this tree is *Paramaatman*, this book is *Paramaatman*, this table is *Paramaatman *- this oneness is by *shareera aatma bhaava*. All these are *shareera * to *Paramaatman. **Paramaatman * exists as inner controller. This is established in the *Shrutis*, as in *Yasya aatmaa shareeram. Yah pruthivyaam tishtan, yah pruthivyaam **antarah, yam pruthivi na veda, yasya pruthivi shareeram, yah pruthivim **antaro yamayati*, ... says *Yaajnyavalkya*. Finally, he says, *yah aatmani **tishthan, aatmano antarah, yam aatmaa na veda, yasya aatmaa shareeram, **yah aatmaanam antaro yamayati, sa te aatmaa antaryaami amrutah*. Even *jeevaatmans * are also His *shareera. Pruthivi, ap*, etc. are all His *shareera*. He exists in everything, controlling from inside. None of them know that He is existing there. He is all the time present in everything. This is told in the *Shruti * itself. 



Otherwise what is the defect that comes. *Paramaatman* is of the nature of *heya pratyaneeka kalyaana gunaashraya*. His nature is opposed to everything that is evil, and He is abode to only auspicious qualities. There are two objects we see - *chetana * and *achetana. Achetana * has got the defect of *vikaara *- it undergoes change in its very essential nature itself; its *svaroopa * itself goes on changing. For *jeevaatmans*, there is *apurushaartha *- contraction and expansion in their *dharma bhoota **jnyaana*. For these kind of objects which have these defects, if *Paramaatman * is said to be one with these, will not the defects of these objects also ensue to *Paramaatman*? This doubt is removed by the *shruti **pramaana, yasya aatmaa shareeram*.  [[74]] 



In this *shloka*, the word *roopam * is *paryaaya pada * for *shareera*. This is explained clearly by *Bhaashyakaarar * in *Vedaartha Sangraha*, and also by *Sri **Sudarshana Suri * in the *vyaakhyaana. Shrutis * and *smrutis * use many words which are *paryaaya padaas * for *shareera. Tanu, vapu, shakti, amsha, kaaya, **roopa *- are all used for *shareera*. There are three relationships - *aadhaara **aadheya, niyaamaka niyaamya, sheshi shesha*. 



***Purushasya kartrutva bhoktrutva chetanatva aadinaa prakrutim iti   
praadhaanyat prathamyam |*** Compared to *prakruti, purusha * is superior because *Purusha * has *kartrutva *\(agency\), *bhoktrutva *\(enjoyership\), *chetanat**va *\(He has *jnyaana aashraya*, He is knower\). 



*Purusha, vyakta, avyakta, kaala * are His *shareera*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 16:*** ***Pradhaana purusha vyakta kaalaanaam paramam hi yat |*** ***Pashyanti soorayah shuddham tat vishnoh paramam padam ||*** 



*Avyakta * is also called *pradhaana*. 



This is also an important *shloka * for our *siddhaanta*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[75]] ***Sarvasya brahma roopatva vachanena chodyam katham parihrutam   
ityata aaha - pradhaana iti |*** The doubt raised here is: Everything is *Brahma roopa*, it was said. *Brahman * exists as *samashti, vyashti*, everything. At the same time, we say that Brahman is without any defect and is abode to all auspicious qualities. If we see *Brahman * in all objects here, how do we know that *Brahman * has this *shuddha svaroopa * also. 



***Paramam padam - padyata iti padam, para praapyatva roopam, yatah   
pradhaana aadi roopebhyah paramam vilakshanam tasmaat soorayah   
shuddham roopa bhoota pradhaana aadi gata vikaara ajnyaana aadi   
rahitam paramam jnyaana aananda aadibhih sarvotkrushtam cha   
pashyanti iti arthah |*** The meaning of *padam * is that which is attained, this is the form of *Paramaatman * which is attained ultimately, and is called *Parama Pada*. This is also explained by *Bhaashyakaarar * in *Vedaartha Sangraha. Parama **Pada * has got three meanings \(i\) It is the *svaroopa * of *Paramaatman*, \(ii\) *jeevaatma svaroopa*, because that is also something which is attained, \(iii\) *Sri Vaikuntha*, where *Paramaatman * is present, and the *nitya sooris * are all there. Here, it is the form which is attained in *Vaikuntha*. Compared to *pradhaana, purusha, vyakta, kaala*, it is different and distinct. This is where the *shuddha roopa * of *Paramaatman * is present, and the *nitya **sooris * are seeing all the time, *sadaa pashyanti soorayah. Bhagavaan's divya **roopa * which exists in *Sri Vaikuntha*, said to be *Parama Pada * here, is *shuddha*, does not have the *vikaara * and *ajnyaana * which is present in *pradhaana, purusha, vyakta, kaala * which have a form. He is different and distinct from all these. The doubt raised is thus cleared. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 17:*** ***Pradhaana purusha vyakta kaalaah tu pravibhaagashah |*** ***Roopaani sthiti sarga anta vyakti sadbhaava hetavah ||***  [[76]] 



This *shloka * establishes many important aspects of our *siddhaanta*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Nanu pradhaana aadeenaam naana roopatvena bhedaat brahmanah   
tadgata vikaara aadi doshaah maa bhoot |*** *Pradhaana, purusha*, etc. each has a different form. There is a clear distinction from one to the other. Let us accept that the *vikaara * does not touch *Brahman. Brahman * is untainted by defects of all these objects. 



***Jagat upaadaana bhootasya brahmanah katham vikaaraadi apraapti iti   
ata aaha - pradhaana iti |*** But, if *Brahman * is said to be the material cause of all these objects, how can Brahman be without the defects of all these things? *Brahman * if it is the material cause, has to undergo a change to become the effect. How can there be not the defect of modification or change in *Brahman*? This is the next doubt. This is answered here. 



***Pradhaana purusha vyakta kaalaa roopaani pravibhaagashah -   
parasparam vikaaritva bhoktrutva aadi svabhaava asankarena   
sthityaadeenaam vyaktou jnyaptou sadbhaave cha hetavah |*** It is answered that it is not so, because the characteristic of *vikaaritva * of *pradhaana*, and *bhoktrutva * of *chetanaas*, they are all without getting mixed up, they are the ones which are the forms of *pradhaana, purusha, vyakta, kaala*. Without getting mixed up with each other, they become the cause of *sthiti*, etc., being seen by the eyes, being known when they manifest, and their presence itself. 



 [[77]] When we plant a seed, after some time, we can say that a tree has come into existence, and we can see that it is a tree. Every object, every entity exists here without any *saankarya*. The cause of their forms is their own bodies, and not *Paramaatman. Paramaatman * exists as inner controller, not getting changed; the change is in the body, *shareera. Paramaatman * does not undergo any change. 



***Vyaktih visheshah |*** There is a special characteristic. 



***Hetu shabdo brahmanah tebhyo niyantrutva sheshitva aadinaa vishesha   
pradarshanaarthah |*** The cause of all these things is their own forms, and Brahman is different and distinct from these. There is a change - the *jeevaatman's dharma **bhoota jnyaana * undergoes a change. *Achetana * undergoes a change in essential form itself. These two being the *shareera * of *Paramaatman*, the change is in the *shareera*, and not in the *Paramaatman * Himself, though He becomes the *upaadaana kaarana*. 





Why should *Paramaatman * do the *srushti*? This is answered here. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 18:*** ***Vyaktam vishnuh tathaa avyaktam purushah kaala eva cha |*** ***Kreedato baalakakasyeva cheshtaam tasya nishaamaya ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Nanu pradhaanaadeenaam srushti aadi hetutvaat vishnoh katham   
kaaranatvam ata aaha - vyaktam iti |***  [[78]] If we say that *pradhaana * and others are the cause for the changing world, then how can *Bhagavaan * be told as the *kaarana*? How can we say that He is the *sarva kaarana*? This is told in this *shloka*. 



***Vyaktaadeenaam tat adheena svaroopa sthiti pravruttitvena tat   
shareeratvaat tat vishishtasya vishnoh kaaranatvam na anupapannam |*** Though there is a modification in the *shareera * only, how can it change without *Paramaatman * being there? Everything is controlled by *Paramaatman*. The very existence of these *chetana achetanaas*, their functioning, and their essential nature, everything is under the control of *Paramaatman*. In this way, they become the *shareera * of *Paramaatman*, and *Paramaatman * who is qualified by these becomes the cause. This is not unreasonable. 



***Vyaktam vishnuh iti aadi | Vyakta aadi shareerako vishnuh iti arthah |*** *Vishnu * is only what is manifested, the unmanifest is also *Vishnu*, *purusha* is also *Vishnu, kaala * is also *Vishnu*, the meaning is *vyakta shareerakah **vishnuh, avyakta shareerakah vishnuh, purusha shareerakah vishnuh, kaala **shareerakah vishnuh*. The *saamaanaadhikaranya * has to be like this only. 



*Saamaanaadhikaranya * has been explained as *bhinaa pravrutti nimittaanaam **shabdaanaam ekasmin arthe vruttih saamaanaadhikaranyam*. If two words which are in the same *vibhakti * tell the different aspects of the same object, this is *saamaanaadhikaranya*. The object which is qualified by these characteristics is one only. The identity is not in the object and attribute, but the two objects which are qualified by two different aspects, for example, *jagat kaarana vishnuh*, and *vyakta shareeraka vishnuh*, these are in *saamaanaadhikaranya*. The *vyakta * which is *brahmaatmaka*, having *Brahman * as the inner controller, and *Vishnu * who is the *jagat **kaarana*, there is *saamaanaadhikaranya. Vishnu * is one only in both. It is not between *Vishnu * and *vyakta * that the *saamaanaadhikaranya * is to be taken.  [[79]] 



***Nanu avaapta samasta kaamasya prayojana abhaavaat srushti aadih na   
upapadyate iti at aaha - kreedata iti | Kreedaa eva prayojanam iti   
arthah |*** This is all a play for *Paramaatman*, just like a boy is playing with a ball. Just like a boy plays for mere pleasure, *Paramaatman * also does *srushti * for *kreedaa*. It is mere sport for Him, though He is *avaapta **samasta kaama*. Whatever He wills, He will attain it. If He does *sankalpa*, that will definitely happen. 



*Lokavat tu leelaa kaivalyam. Leelaa eva kaaranam*. This is explained by *Bhaashyakaarar*. A *saarvabhouma*, ruler who has got everything, also engages in sport, just for entertainment. Like this, it is not unreasonable for *Paramaatman * to do *srushti*, as *leelaa. Leelaa * is also explained as *dayaa **kaarya*, as all *chetanaas * are lying as *achetana*, and if *srushti * does not happen, they cannot uplift themselves. Out of compassion, *Paramaatman * does *srushti*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 19:*** ***Avyaktam kaaranam yat tat pradhaanam rishi sattamaih |*** ***Prochyate prakrutih sookshmaa nityam sat asat aatmakam ||*** ***The cause which is unmanifest, the primordial matter, as told by Manu   
and other rishis. *** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 20:*** ***Akshayam na anyat aadhaaram ameyam ajaram dhruvam |*** ***Shabda sparsha viheenam tat roopaadibhih asamhitam ||*** 





 [[80]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 21:*** ***Trigunam tat jagat yonih anaadi prabhavaapyayam |*** ***Tena agre sarvam eva aaseet vyaaptam vai pralayaadanu ||*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 22:*** ***Veda vaada vido brahma niyataa brahma vaadinah |*** ***Pathanti chaitamevaartham pradhaana pratipaadakam ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Atha srushtim vaktum pralaya avasaane avasthitaanaam pradhaana   
purusha aadeenaam svaroopam aaha - avyaktam ityaadi panchabhih |*** The *svaroopa * of *pradhaana, purusha*, etc. at the time of end of *pralaya*, are told, in order to tell about creation. This is told in these five *shlokaas*. 



***Avyaktam iti | Yat tat iti | Bhagavat roopatayaa uktam yat avyaktam   
tat prakrutih pradhaanam iti aadi shabdaih uchyate manvaadibhih, na   
saankhyaadi abhimatam, nityam sat asat aatmakam - chetana achetana   
aatmakatvena nityam | \* Daaruni agnih iti vakshyati |*** Whatever was told as the *shareera * of *Paramaatman*, the unmanifest primordial matter, is called as *prakruti * and *pradhaana*, by *Manu * and other *rishis*. Whatever they have told is in line with what is taught in the *Shrutis*. There are others like *Saankhya * by *Kapila * which are opposed to what is told in the *Shrutis*, these are not acceptable. 



The name of *Kapila * comes in the *Shrutis*, and whatever is told by him has to be accepted, is the objection. This objection is removed by *Brahma Sutra **kaarar, Baadaraayanar*, that *Saankhya Smruti * has a lot of things which are  [[81]] opposed to what is taught in the *Shrutis*. One of them is that *pradhaana * is *abrahmaatmaka*; they do not accept *Brahman*; they have only *purusha * and *prakruti*; creation happens when the *pradhaana * modifies itself; it is *abrahmaatmaka * they say, and it acts by itself; this is not acceptable and is not as per what is told in the *Shrutis*. 



*Sat shabdavaachya brahma * is told. *Asat shabdavaachya * is also told, which means that *naama roopa vyaakarana * was not there. When nothing was differentiated into name and form, it is called as *asat*. This entire universe of *chetanaas, achetanaas * was existing as *sat shabda vaachya*, as *sookshma **chit achit vishishta Paramaatman*, before *srushti*. He became *sthoola chit **achit vishishta Paramaatman*, after *srushti*. Like fire which exists in the wood, but is not seen. When two wood pieces are rubbed, then *agni * is supposed to be produced. 



***Akshayam iti | Akshayam akrutsna parinaami | Akshayyam iti paathe   
kshaya anarham | Na anyat aadhaaram akaaryatvaat anyatra   
asamavetam | Anyatra shabdasya pullingatve api dandaadheshah   
samaase tat alopascha aarshou | Ameyam - desha kaala aadinaa |   
Ajaram - kaalena na jeeryati | Dhruvam spanda rahitam | Vishesha   
guna raahityam aaha - shabdeti |*** *Chetanaas* are existing inside *achetana*, and are unseen. *Prakruti * is told as *akshaya*, meaning that it does not change completely; part of the *prakruti * undergoes change and *mahat * is formed. In the *avyakta * form, it is *nitya*, eternal. Primordial matter is *nitya * means that it is not the effect of something; *akaarya * means that it is not an effect, does not have a *kaarana. **Paramaatman * does not create *avyakta * during *srushti*; *avyakta * is an eternal entity existing all the time - *achetana*. In the *avyakta * form, it is an eternal entity. *Paramaatman * only makes *avyakta * to undergo modification being its inner controller, *antaryaami*; it becomes *mahat, ahamkaara*, etc., they then merge back in the reverse order, and then it remains as *avyakta. **Meya * means measurable, and *ameya * means immeasurable. *Prakruti * is existing everywhere in this *prakruti mandala*. It does not become old. It is  [[82]] without any vibrations. It does not have *shabda, sparsha*, etc., they comes only after *pancheekarana*. After *pancheekarana*, the *aakaasha * is formed, and it has got quality of *shabda, vaayu * has got quality of *shabda * and *sparsha*, etc. Even the forms are not there before *pancheekarana*. 



***Trigunam iti | Trigunam gunatraya aatmakam |   
Anaadiprabhavaapyayam - aadih kaaranam, prabhavah janma, apyayah   
layah, taih viheenam | Agre srushte poorva kaale; pralayaadanu   
praakruti pralaya kaala ante, vyaaptam grastam, ambhasaa iva   
lavanam |*** It is *tri gunaatmaka. Aadi prabhava aapyaya rahitam **anaadiprabhavaapyayam*, there is *nai samaasa*; it does not have a *kaarana*, it is always existing, it is not created, and is an eternal entity; everything merges into it and stays in *eki bhaava * with *Paramaatman*. Before *srushti * means at the end of *praakruta pralaya. Vyaaptam * means eclipsed, or surrounded, just like the salt is dissolved in water, all these were swallowed by *pradhaana, avyakta * at the end of *praakruta pralaya*. 



***Vedeti | Veda vaada vidah veda vaado vaidika nyaayah; tat vidah,   
brahma niyataah vedaartha eka ruchayah; brahma vaadinah - brahma   
eka kaaranatva vaadinah | Etam uktam eva artham prati, pradhaana   
pratipaadakam shloka dvayam pathanti iti aaha - pathanti iti |*** *Veda vaada* means according to the logic as told in the *Vedaas*, those who are knowledgeable about it. *Brahma niyataah * means those interested only in what is taught in the *Vedaas. Brahma vaadinah * means those who understand and believe and know that *Brahman * only is the sole cause of everything. They tell about these two *shlokaas * telling about *pradhaana*. 



*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shlokaas 23, 24:***  [[83]] ***Na aho na raatrih nabho na bhoomih na aaseet tamo jyotih abhoot cha   
naanyat |*** ***Shrotraadi buddhyaa anupalabhyamekam praadhaanikam brahma   
pumaan tat aaseet ||*** 



***Vishnoh svaroopaat paratodite dve roope pradhaanam purushascha   
vipra |*** ***Tasya eva te anyena ghrute viyukte roopaantaram tat dvija kaala   
samjyam ||*** 



These *shlokaas * are *pradhaana pratipaadaka shlokaas*. We shall take them up in the next class. 



***Question***: Please explain the terms *mahat * and *prakruti*. ***Answer***: *Prakruti * is also told as *avyakta * or *pradhaana*, which is primordial matter, which is the unmanifest state of matter, at the time of *pralaya*. During *srushti, Paramaatman * being the *antaryaami*, makes it to undergo change, and a part of it undergoes change. It is *trigunaatmaka*. It undergoes change and becomes a new entity called *mahat *- this is also an inert *tattva*, unseen, unmanifest. *Paramaatman * who is *antaryaami * of *mahat*, makes it to undergo change, and it becomes *ahamkaara*. There are three *ahamkaaraas - **saatvika, raajasa, taamasa*. From the *saatvika * and *raajasa ahamkaaraas*, eleven *indriyaas * are created. From the *raajasa * and *taamasa ahamkaara, **pancha tanmaatraas * and *pancha bhootaas * are created. Then *pancheekarana * happens. 



We were studying the nature of *prakruti * and *purusha*, that existed before *srushti*, at the end of *pralaya*. In order to teach about *srushti, **Paraasharar * tells about the *svaroopa * of *pradhaana * and *purusha * and others, at the time of the end of the *pralaya*, before *srushti*. Then he will start  [[84]] telling about *srushti*. While telling this, he tells that everything is *Paramaatman * only, everything is *Bhagavaan's shareera*; the change that happens is only in the *shareera * and not in the *Paramaatman*, who is inseparably associated, and is immutable. If He does not undergo any change, if the change is only in the *shareera * which is *chetana * and *achetana, **\(svaroopa vikaara * in the *achetana * and *svabhaava vikaara * in the *chetana * in the *dharma bhoota jnyaana*\), how can *Paramaatman * be called the cause of creation? It is because the very existence, sustenance and functioning of these *chetanaas * and *achetanaas*, is controlled by *Paramaatman*, and they are all inseparably associated with Him. As a qualified entity, He can also be called as the cause - He is the main cause. Creation is a mere sport for Him, *Kreedato baalakakasyeva cheshtaam tasya nishaamaya*, just like a boy is playing. *Kreedaa eva prayojanam iti arthah*. 



*Avyakta*, which is called as *pradhaana * by *Manu * and other *rishis*, is the cause. It is *prakruti*, very subtle, *sookshma, nitya*, eternal. It is not an effect; it is the cause of *mahat, ahamkaara*; it is an eternal entity, always existing. There is no vibration - *sattva, rajas, tamas * are all equal in proportion at the time of *pralaya*. It is *triguna*, has three qualities. *Shabda, **sparsha*, etc. are not there at the time of *pralaya*, and are manifested at the time of *vyashti srushti*, when the division happens into name and form. 



*Veda vaadis*, establish reality only based on what is taught in the *shrutis*. *Brahma vaadis * accept that *Brahman * is only the *kaarana*, the cause. 



Two *shlokaas * about *pradhaana * are well known. 



*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shlokaas 23, 24:*** ***Na aho na raatrih nabho na bhoomih na aaseet tamo jyotih abhoot cha   
naanyat |***  [[85]] ***Shrotraadi buddhyaa anupalabhyam ekam praadhaanikam brahma   
pumaan tat aaseet ||*** There was no day, no night, no sky, no earth, no *tamas*, no light or darkness. There was nothing which could be known from *shrotra * and others. *Pradhaana, Brahma * and *samashti purusha*, were there. 



***Vishnoh svaroopaat paratah udite dve roope pradhaanam purushascha   
vipra |*** ***Tasya eva te anyena dhrute viyukte roopaantaram tat dvija kaala   
samjyam ||*** This tells about *kaala*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tat eva shloka dvayam darshayati - na ahah iti | Shrotra aadi   
buddhyaa na anupalabhyam - shabda aadi raahityaat shrotra aadi   
janya jnyaane agamyam |*** When we hear something, we understand it - this is *shrotra janya jnyaana*. By seeing, we get some knowledge - this is *chakshur janya jnyaana*. Because there was no *shabda*, etc., everything was merged in *pradhaana, prakruti*, it was *avyakta*, and not divided into name and form. *Pancha bhoota **tattvas * were not there. There was nothing that could be known through *shrotra * and others. 



***Pradhaanam eva praadhaanikam, svaarthe thak pratyayah |*** *Pradhaana * means *moola prakruti*, it was *avyakta*. 



 [[86]] ***Brahma cha, pumaan samashti purushascha ekam aaseet, \* tam aaseet   
tamasaa goodham agre, \* tamah pare deve ekee bhavati \* ityaadi   
shruteh |*** *Pradhaana, Brahma, samashti purusha*, the collectivity of all the *chetanaas *- were all existing as one. *Shruti pramaanaas * are given. *Srushti * happens, and *pralaya * happens in the reverse order. In *srushti*, causes become effects, and *kaarana* becomes *kaarya, **prakruti * becomes *mahat, mahat * becomes *ahamkaara, **ahamkaara * becomes *tanmaatraas*, etc. In *pralaya*, it is reverse order, *tanmaatraas * become merged into *ahamkaara, ahamkaara * merges in *mahat, mahat * merges in *prakruti*, then all the *samashti purushaas * join together, everything joins *Paramaatman. Avyaktam akshare leeyate, **aksharam tamasi leeyate, tamah pare deve ekee bhavati*. 



In *shruti*, it is told wonderfully about *pralaya*. There is *naasadeeya sookta*, in *Rig * and *Yajur vedaas*. There was nothing - there was no death, nor immortality, it was one with *svadhaa*. There is a question asked - who knows from where everything came? Who created all these things? *Yah asya **adhyakshah parame vyoman*. In *parama vyoma*, one who is presiding over all these things, He knows. He only knows, nobody else knows. 



***Na aho na raatrih iti sthoola kaala upaadhi bhoota jyotitaraadi   
nishedhe api tadaa aaseet iti nirdeshaat sookshmah kaalah asti iti   
gamyate |*** *Kaala* is said to be two - *akhanda kaala * and *khanda kaala. Akhanda **kaala * means there is no division - there is one time. *Khanda kaala * means we see divisions like *kalaa, kaashtha, muhoortha, aho, raatri, paksha, maasa, **samvatsara *- this is *oupaadhika*. It is told that there is no day, no night, no light, no darkness - those which give the division of time we see here. The word *tadaa * indicates time. Though there was no division of time we see here, like day, night, etc., one *akhanda kaala*, the *sookshma kaala * still existed at that time.  [[87]] 



So, what existed before *srushti * was *pradhaana * or *avyakta, **Brahman * and *samashti purushaas. Brahman * is *nitya vibhooti vishshta. Nitya **vibhooti * is outside the scope of this creation and destruction. *Nitya **vibhooti * is eternally present there. *Paramaatman * who is *nitya vibhooti **vishishta, divya soori vishishta, divya bhooshana, divya aayudha, divya **mahishi*, was existing, along with *pradhaana * and *samashti purusha*. 



***Vishnoh svaroopaat iti | Atra svaroopa shabdo roopa vachanah;   
svaroopaat roopaat |*** This means from *Vishnu's shareera*. It is not that *Bhagavaan's * essential nature itself divided into *purusha * and *pradhaana*. 



*Chetana samashti * and *achetana * which was existing as *avyakta *- they were present at that time. Two forms which are *pradhaana * and *purusha * manifested. 



***Udite udbhoote; aarshah sandhih |*** We can say as *paratah udite*, which is *aarsha sandhi*. 



***Dite iti paricchede vibhakte iti arthah tasmaat tamas sanjaayate \* iti   
shruteh |*** Or can say that *paratah dite, viyukte*, separated. Two forms separated from Him, inseparably associated but differentiated. 



***Te roope viyukte |*** 



 [[88]] ***Srushti arha samyoga virahite yathaa syaataam tathaa tasya eva, yena   
anyena ghrute stah tat roopaantaram kaala sanjyam |*** *Avyakta * and *samshti purusha * were united into *Paramaatman * as if they cannot be separated as though they are one. During *srushti*, they manifest in such a way that they can become effects, can manifest themselves in the gross form; they become separated from *Paramaatman * in such a way that they can manifest. Another thing which supports this is *kaala*, time. 



***Te anye anye aarshatvaat saadhuh sandhih |*** This is the *aarsha sandhi * told by a *rishi*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 25:*** ***Prakrutou samsthitam vyaktam ateeta pralaye tu yat |*** ***Tasmaat praakruta samjnyah ayam uchyate pratisancharah ||*** *Pratisanchara * means *pralaya*. This *pralaya * is called *praakruta pralaya*. Whatever was present in *prakruti*, when creation happens, it gets manifested. Because it was all merged into *prakruti*, and present in *prakruti*, it is called *praakruta pralaya*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Prakrutou iti | Prakrutou samsthitam leenam | Pratisancharah -   
pralayah |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 26:*** ***Anaadih bhagavaan kaalo naanto asya dvija vidyate |*** ***Avyucchinnaah tatah tu ete sarga sthiti anta samyamaah ||***  [[89]] *Avyucchinnaah * means unceased, or uninterrupted. *Kaala * is always there, it is like a *pravaaha*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Kaalasya prakruti purusha samyojakatvaat vyakta utpatti aadi   
pravaaha hetutvaat cha vyaktavat na prakrutou layah iti aaha -   
anaadih iti |*** *Paraasharar* says that everything is merged into *prakruti*, so it is called *praakruta paralaya. Purushaas * are existing separately, they are *chetanaas*, they are united together as *tamas*, united in *Paramaatman*. At time time, what happens to *kaala*? Everything happens at a particular time, *srushti * happens at a particular time. Getting manifested, creation, are like a continuous stream happening; in this way, one of the causes is also *kaala*. Like *vyakta*, whatever is manifest, *kaala * does not merge into *prakruti. Kaala * is said to be *anaadi *- there is no beginning and there is no end. 



***Tatah - kaalaat; kaalasya anaadyantatvaat sarga kaala nirodhah   
samyamah jagat niyamana anupravesho vaa | *** *Sarga* \(creation\), *sthiti *\(sustenance\), *anta *\(the end or *pralaya*\), *samyama *\(cessation of creation\) - these four things are told. Or *samyama * can be told as *jagat niyamana anupravesha * doing *anupravesha* for controlling happens. 



***Prakruti purusha roopavat kaala roopam api parasmin antarhitam |*** Just like *prakruti * and *samashti purushaas * which get united with *Paramaatman * and stay one with Him, *kaala * is also united with *Paramaatman*. 





 [[90]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 27:*** ***Guna saamye tatah tasmin pruthak pumsi vyavasthite |*** ***Kaala svaroopam tat vishnoh maitreya parivartate ||*** Now, starting of *srushti * is going to be told. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Prakruteh avishada satata parinaama ganita dvi paraardha   
kaalaavasaane prathamam srushti kaala unmeshanam aaha guna   
saamya iti | *** The *srushti kaala * starts. *Paraardha * is half of the life of *Chaturmukha **Brahma. Dvi paraardha * means two *paraardhaas. Paraardha * is said to be the highest number that is possible to count - this is 50 years of *Brahma's * life. *Avishada * means that is not manifest. At the end of hundred years of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, is when *praakruta pralaya * happens. Up to that, it is continuously undergoing changes. After that is *praakruta pralaya*, and then *srushti * happens, creation starts. 



***Guna saamye sattva aadi guna saamya roope guna saamya   
niroopaneeye tasmin pradhaanam pumsi cha prutham vyavasthite   
pruthak viyukte sthite sati, tat kaala svaroopam parivartate - srujya   
jeeva karma anuguna sarga anukoolam bhavati iti arthah |*** In *pralaya* time, *sattva, rajas, tamas * are all equal. If one of them changes, *srushti * happens. At the time when *pradhaana * can be known as having *sattva, rajas, tamas * as equal, when the primordial matter and *chetanaas * were existing separately, how does time get modified? It becomes favourable for creation according to the *karmaas * of the sentients who are all going to be part of creation. We can say that time becomes ripe for creation. 



 [[91]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shlokaas 28, 29:*** ***Tatah tu tat param brahma paramaatmaa jaganmayah |*** ***Sarvagah sarvabhooteshah sarvaatmaa parameshvarah ||*** Then the *Paramaatman*, who has everything as His body, is present everywhere, the ruler of all beings, ... 



***Pradhaana purushou cha api pravishyati aatmecchayaa harih |*** ***Kshobhayaamaasa sampraapte sarga kaale vyaya avyayou ||*** *Vishnu, Sriman Naaraayana*, out of His own willing, *sankalpa*, enters into *pradhaana * and *purusha*, when the time for creation comes, causes disturbance in *prakruti*, which is *vyaya*, which undergoes change, and *avyaya*, which is the *chetanaas, jeevaatman * who do not undergo any change, after entering into them. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Atha srushtyartham pradhaana pumsoh kshobhamaaha - tata iti |*** 



***Pradhaanam iti | Aatmecchayaa \* bahu syaam iti sankalpaatmikayaa,   
pravishya - vishayeekrutya, kshobhayaamaasa sarge unmukhou   
chakaara | Pradhaanasya kshobho guna vaishamyam pravrutti   
unmukhatvam cha, pumso jnyaana vikaasah samskaara udbodhah cha |   
Vyaya avyayou - vyayati iti vyayah, avyayah - vyayarahitah, vikaara   
kootasthou iti arthah |*** He does *sankalpa * that 'Let Me become many, let Me be born'. He is present everywhere, what does it mean that He is going to enter? It means making that as the object of His action. Disturbance, is that He made them ready for creation. What is the readiness of *pradhaana * for creation, means, He creates disturbance in the three qualities, *sattva, rajas, tamas*, so that it  [[92]] starts getting modified. For *chetanaas*, the readiness for creation is *jnyaana **vikaasa*; during *pralaya*, their *dharma bhoota jnyaana * is contracted very much, so that they are lying down like *achetana*; during *srushti*, He will make them know, and his experiences and impressions from the earlier births, he will be made aware of all that. *Vyaya * is *vikaara*, undergoing change, and *avyaya * is *kootastha, jeevaatmans * will not be undergoing any change. Through this disturbance, He makes them ready for creation. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 30:*** ***Yathaa sannidhi maatrena gandhah kshobhaaya jaayate |*** ***Manaso na upakartrutvaat tathaa asou parameshvarah ||*** This is an example given. Just by mere presence, mere nearness, fragrance creates disturbance or agitates what is nearby, of the mind; fragrance by mere nearness, can cause change to undergo in the mind, without being an instrument; in the same way, by *Paramaatman*, the disturbance is like that. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Eeshvarah prakruti purushayoh kshobhane api svayam avikaarah iti   
aaha - yathaa iti |*** *Paramaatman * is *avikaara*, does not undergo any change; His mere presence, His *sankalpa * can cause disturbance. 



***Yathaa gandhah kinchit vikaara rahito api sannidhi maatrena manasah   
kshobhaaya sukha dukha aadi vikaaraaya bhavati |*** The fragrance does not undergo any change, it is just present nearby. Just its mere presence causes *sukha* and *dukha*, which are *vikaaras * of the mind. The mind undergoes change.  [[93]] The fragrance does not undergo any change, it is just present nearby. Just its mere presence causes *sukha * and *dukha*, which are *vikaaras * of the mind. The mind undergoes change. Just like this, *Paramaatman's * presence can itself cause change in *chetana * and *achetana*. 





A question arises. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 31:*** ***Sa eva kshobhako brahman kshobhyah cha purushottamah |*** ***Sa sankocha vikaasaabhyaam pradhaanatve api cha sthitah ||*** The one who causes this disturbance is also He only, the one who undergoes disturbance is also He only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Gandha drushtaantena tasya nimittatvam eva kim iti aashankaayaam   
upaadaanam api sa eva iti aaha - sa eva iti |*** The *gandha * which is present, which causes disturbance in the mind, is not *upaadaana kaarana * for those effects, it is only *nimitta*. Is *Paramaatman * also only *nimitta kaarana*, as *gandha drushtaanta * is given. How can He be told as *upaadaana kaarana * also? This is established here. 



***Kshobakah san pradhaana purushaatmakam svayam eva kshobayati |*** He, who has *pradhaana* and *purusha * as His body, changes Himself. 



***Na hi svasmaat bahirbhootam kulaalo mrut pindam iva, \* tat   
aatmaanam svayam akuruta \* aatma kruteh; \* sah abhidhyaaya   
shareeraat sukhaat \* ityaadibhyah |***  [[94]] It is not like a potter who creates a pot out of mud, which is external to him. It is not like that for *Paramaatman. Paramaatman * is not doing like that. He Himself makes effect into Himself. 



This is told wonderfully in the *Prakruti Adhikarana*, which is the last-but-one *adhikarana* of the fourth *paada * of the First Chapter of *Brahma Sutraas*. There are six *sutraas*, and the first of these says " *Prakrutih cha". **Paramaatman * is only the *upaadaana kaarana*. One of the reasons why He is told as *upaadaana kaarana * is *aatma kruteh*. From His own *shareera*, doing *sankalpa*, He created all these beings. *Achetana, chetana * are all His *shareera*, inseparably associated. Still He remains unchanged all the time. There is no change in His *svaroopa svabhaava*. There is change only in His attributes, which are *chetana * and *achetana. Achetana * undergoes change in *svaroopa * itself, and *chetana * undergoes change in *svabhaava*, according to the *karmaas * of the *jeevaatman*. 



***Na kevalam jagat upaadaanam, kaarya bhootam jagat api sa eva iti   
aaha - sa sankocha iti | Sankocha-vikaasaabhyaam yuktah   
pradhaanatve api sthitah sa eva |*** He is *nimitta kaarana * is told first; then it is told that He is *upaadaana **kaarana*. Not only *upaadaana kaarana*, He is only present as effect. The world which is an effect is also He only. Associated with contraction and expansion, He is also present as *pradhaana*. Everything is Himself, but He is also their *shareeri*. They are all inseparably associated. The *shareeri * does not undergo any change. 



We also see this in the *jeevaatman*. During young age, middle age, old age, all the changes happen to the body, whereas *jeevaatman * remains unchanged inside. They are associated inseparably. In the same way, *Paramaatman * who is *antaryaami*, though there is change in the *jeevaatman's dharma bhoota jnyaana*, He does not undergo any change. He being *antaryaami * of everything, is present as everything, as everything is  [[95]] His *shareera*. Anything which has name and form is there only because He has done *antah pravesha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 32:*** ***Vikaasa anu svaroopaih cha brahma roopa aadibhih tathaa |*** ***Vyakta svaroopah cha tathaa vishnuh sarveshvareshvarah ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Vikaasa iti | Vikaasa anusvaroopaih vyashti samaashti roopaih cha,   
tathaa brahma aadi roopaih cha yuktah; sa eva vyakta svaroopah -   
mahat aadi svaroopah cha |*** *Vikaasa svaroopa * is whatever is manifested in the gross form. And what is in the *samashti*, collectivity, and Brahma and other forms; everything, He is only associated. The *mahat, ahamkaara*, etc. are also He only. He is the supporter of everything. 





Now, *srushti * is going to be told. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 33:*** ***Guna saamyaat tatah tasmaat kshetrajnya adhisthitaat mune |*** ***Guna vyanjana sambhootih sarga kaale dvijottama ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Srushtim aaha - guna saamyaat iti | Tatah - kshobhaanantaram |   
Kshetrajnya karma preritaat guna saamyaat - guna shakti saamya   
roopaat pradhaanaat, vyajyante anena gunaa iti guna vyanjanam   
mahat tattvam, tasya sambhootih |***  [[96]] *Tatah * means after *Paramaatman * starts creation. From the *pradhaana * which was existing before *srushti*, having all *gunaas * in equality, being impelled by the *karmaas * of the *kshetrajnyaas*. At the time of *srushti*, the first thing created is *guna vyanjana*, which is *mahat tattva*. In the *moola **prakruti * form, the *gunaas * are all equal. Whereas when there is some disturbance, and something undergoes change, then *prakruti * becomes *mahat*. In the *mahat*, some *guna * will be prominent. 



We saw so far how before *srushti*, *Paramaatman * makes them ready for creation, and brings awareness, *samskaara*, and makes it ready for *guna **vaishamya*; He being *antaryaami * is the cause, and everything happens in Him. Everything is Him only, and the effect is also Him only. He is only the *upaadaana kaarana*, the material cause. Though He is *upaadaana **kaarana*, He does not undergo any change. It is not like a potter who makes a pot out of mud. 



*Bhagavaan * will start when the time comes; He does the *sankalpa, kaala * will make everything ready. Time becomes right for creation to start, according to the *karmaas * of all the *jeevaas. Paramaatman * will do *anupravesha*, He will impel them; the *guna saamya * will get disturbed; *guna vaishamya * will come in *pradhaana*, He will do *sankalpa - bahusyaam prajaayeya*. With all the changes happening in *prakruti * and *purusha, Bhagavaan * remains unchanged. 



An example was given, of fragrance. Fragrance, when present creates a reaction in the mind, and it does not get changed in any way. *Paramaatman * also does not get changed in any way; He brings about changes in *prakruti * and *purusha*. And, He is also not just *nimitta **kaarana * like fragrance, but He is also the *upaadaana kaarana*, as the changes happen in Him only. Because everything is associated inseparably with *Paramaatman * only. Changes are in *Paramaatman's shareera * and not in His *svaroopa * or *svabhaava. Achetana * and *chetana * are inseparably associated  [[97]] with Him as His *shareera*. He is controlling them, He is their support and master. 



Creation of the various *tattvaas*, in order, is going to be told now. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 33:*** ***Guna saamyaat tatah tasmaat kshetrajnya adhisthitaat mune |*** ***Guna vyanjana sambhootih sarga kaale dvijottama ||*** 



There is a *vaishamya * in the *gunaas * which is happening, one of them becomes more or less, and creation starts. *Moola prakruti * becomes *mahat. **Mahat * becomes *guna vyanjana. Vyajyante anena gunaah *- qualities are shown in this. Impelled by the *karmaas * of the *kshetrajnya*, the *jeevaatmans*, due to *prakruti*, the *mahat tattva * is formed at the time of creation. 





The next stages of creation are explained. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 34:*** ***Pradhaana tattvam udbhootam mahaantam tat samaavrunot |*** ***Saatviko raajasah cha eva taamasah cha tridhaa mahaan ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Pradhaana tattvam iti | Udbhootam mahaantam tat pradhaanam   
samaavrunot | *** *Pradhaana tattva * envelops the *mahat tattva*. 



 [[98]] ***Yadaa udbhootam iti pradhaana visheshanam | Saatvika ityaadi |   
Saatvikatvaadikam pradesha bhedhena udbhootam guna trayam |*** *Sattva, rajas * and *tamas gunaas *- one of them becomes more and based on this, the state changes. This modifies into three different *tattvaas *- *saatvika **ahamkaara, raajasa ahamkaara, taamasa ahamkaara*. The three qualities of *pradhaana, saatvika, raajasa * and *taamasa * are told. From that, they are manifesting. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 35:*** ***Pradhaana tattvena samam tvachaa beejam iva aavrutam |*** ***Vaikaarikah taijasah cha bhootaadischaiva taamasah ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Pradhaana tattvena iti | Samam bahissamantatah | *** *Samam * means from outside completely. As though the seed is enveloped by outer skin, the *mahat tattva * is enveloped by *pradhaana. Pradhaana * is *moola **prakruti*. 



***Vaikaarikah - saatvikah, taijaso raajasah, bhootaadih taamasah,   
vaikaarika padena avikaara roopasya parama sattvasya vyaavruttih, \*   
Kaamam devaah cha munayah sattvasthaa nrupasattama | Heenaah   
sattvena sookshmena tato vaikaarikaah smrutaah | Iti moksha dharma   
ukteh |*** *Vaikaarika* is *saatvika ahamkaara, taijasa * is *raajasa ahamkaara, **bhootaadi * is *taamasa ahamkaara. Saatvika, raajasa * and *taamasa **ahamkaaraas * are told by the terms *vaikaarika, taijasa * and *bhootaadi. **Vaikaarika * means that it is of *vikaara svabhaava*, undergoes changes. *Bhootaadi * also means that it is the cause of *pancha bhootaas*. There is one more *sattva * known as *shuddha sattva*, or *parama sattva*, which  [[99]] is in *Parama Pada*; this *sattva * is different from the *sattva guna * of *prakruti*. Because the *sattva guna * of *pradhaana * undergoes changes. Whereas the *shuddha sattva * in *Parama Pada * does not undergo any change. The *Moksha dharma * quotation is told about how the *vaikaarika * word is mentioned. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 36:*** ***Tri vidho ayam ahamkaaro mahat tattvaat ajaayata |*** ***Bhootendriyaanaam hetuh sah trigunatvaat mahaa mune |** ****Tathaa pradhaanena mahaan mahataa saa tathaa vrutah ||** *These are the three types of *ahamkaara tattva * created from *mahat tattva*. This is the cause of *pancha bhootaas * and the eleven *indriyaas*. *** ***



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Trividha iti | Bhootendriyaanaam hetum sah iti atra taamasa amshena   
bhootaanaam hetuh, saatvika amshena indriyaanaam | Raajasa   
amshena ubhayoh anugraahakah |*** *Ahamkaara * is of three types. From the *saatvika ahamkaara*, eleven *indriyaas **- jnyaanendrika, karmendriya * and *manas * are created. From *taamasa **ahamkaara, pancha bhootaas * and *pancha tanmaatraas * are created. *Raajasa **ahamkaara * helps both in the creation of the respective *indriyaas * and *pancha **bhootaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 37:*** ***Yathaa pradhaanena mahaan mahataa saa tathaa vrutah ||*** ***Bhootaadih tu vikurvaanah shabda tanmaatrakam tatah |*** ***Sasarja shabda tanmaatraat aakaasham shabda lakshanam ||***  [[100]] The way *mahat tattva * is enveloped by *pradhaana*, in the same way, the *ahamkaara tattva * is enveloped by *mahat tattva. Taamasa **ahamkaara * will modify and create *shabda tanmaatra*. 



*Tanmaatra * is a middle state. When milk becomes curd, the mid state between milk and curd, called as *kalala*, is like the *tanmaatra*. In the same way, *taamasa ahamkaara * becomes *shabda tanmaatra*, and then becomes *aakaasha. Shabda tanmaatra * is a very *sookshma avasthe*. 



From *taamasa ahamkaara*, assisted by *raajasa ahamkaara, shabda **tanmaatra * is created. From *shabda tanmaatra, aakaasha * is created. From *aakaasha, sparsha tanmaatra * is created. From *sparsha tanmaatra, **vaayu * is created. From *vaayu, roopa tanmaatra * is created. From *roopa **tanmaatra, tejas \(agni\)* is created. From *tejas, rasa tanmaatra * is created. From *rasa tanmaatra, ap * is created, water. From *ap, gandha tanmaatra * is created. From *gandha tanmaatra, pruthivi * is created. *Aakaashaat vaayuh, **vaayoh agnih, agneh aapah, apbhyah pruthivi. Aakaasha, vaayu, agni, ap, **pruthivi * are the *pancha bhootaas*. In between states are the *tanmaatraas*. 



We should understand that there should not be any *virodha * between *shrutis * and *smrutis*. In *shrutis*, in one place, it says ' *Ashtou prakrutayah, shodashakascha vikaaraah*' - there are eight causes, and there are sixteen effects. The eight causes are *moola prakruti, mahat, **ahamkaara*, and five *tanmaatraas*. The sixteen *vikaaraas*, effects, are eleven *indriyaas * and *pancha bhootaas*. 



In the *srushti prakarana * of *Chandogya * and in *Taittriya Upanishad*, the *tanmaatraas * are not mentioned. Whereas in the *laya **prakarana * of *Subaalopanishad*, the *tanmaatraas * are mentioned. *Tanmaatraani bhootaadou leeyante*. 



 [[101]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Bhootaadih ityaadi | Tato bhootaadi vikurvaanah kshubhyan, anabhi   
vyakta vishesha shabda gunakam shabda tanmaatram sasarja | Shabda   
tanmaatraat shabda vishesha lakshanam sthoola aakaasham abhoot iti   
arthah |*** *Bhootaadi * undergoes disturbance, change, *shabda tanmaatra*, in which the *shabda guna * is not manifested, is created. *Aakaasha*, which is having the quality of *shabda*, the gross *aakaasha*, when the *pancheekarana * is not yet done, is created. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 38:*** ***Shabda maatram tathaa aakaasham bhootaadih sa samaavrunot |*** ***Aakaashah tu vikurvaanah sparsha maatram sasarja ha ||*** *Bhootaadi * envelopes *shabda tanmaatra * and *aakaasha * both. The previous *tanmaatra * envelopes the next *tanmaatra * and the *vishesha. **Aakaasha * got modified to *sparsha tanmaatraa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Shabda maatram iti | Shabda maatram - shabda tanmaatram; tathaa   
aakaasham - sthoola aakaasham cha, sah bhootaadih, aavrunot | Etena   
poorva poorva tanmaatram uttara uttara tanmaatram tat vishesham   
cha aavrunot iti darshitam | Aakashah tu iti | Aakaashah - tanmaatra   
roopa sthoola aakaasham iva sparsha tanmaatram cha sasarja |*** *Bhootaadi * enveloped *aakaasha * and *shabda tanmaatra*. By this, we have to understand that the previous *tanmaatra * envelopes the successive *tanmaatra * and the *vishesha*, where the qualities are manifested. *Aakaasha * gets modified into *sparsha tanmaatra*. 





 [[102]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 39:*** ***Balavaan abhavat vaayuh tasya sparsho guno matah |*** ***Aakaasham shabda maatram tu sparsha maatram samaavrunot ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Balavaan iti | Balavaan abhoot vaayuh, sparsha maatraat iti sheshah |   
Sparshah sparsha visheshah |*** From the *sparsha tanmaatra, vaayu * is created. The quality of *vaayu * is *sparsha*. It has got *shabda * and *sparsha * both. Previous *tanmaatra * envelopes the next *vishesha * and next *tanmaatra*. Because of this, the qualities are carried over from the causes to the effects. 



In our *siddhaanta*, we accept that *pruthivi * has all the five qualities, *shabda, **sparsha, roopa, rasa * and *gandha. Aakaasha * has got only *shabda. Vaayu * has got *shabda * and *sparsha. Tejas * has got *shabda, sparsha, roopa. Ap * has got *shabda, sparsha, roopa, rasa. Pruthivi * has got all five. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 40:*** ***Tato vaayuh vikurvaano roopa maatram sasarja ha |*** ***Jyotirutpadyate vaayoh tat roopa gunam uchyate ||*** *Vaayu * undergoes change and creates *roopa tanmaatra*. From the previous *shabda tanmaatra*, and the *roopa tanmaatra, tejas*, or *agni * or *jyoti * is created. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[103]] ***Tata iti | Vaayuh tanmaatra roopah roopa maatram sasarja | Jyotiriti   
| Vaayoh roopa tanmaatra sahitaat vaayoh, sparsha tanmaatra   
roopaat sthoolam jyotih utpadyate iti arthah | Atra idam   
anusandheyam | Poorva poorva tanmaatra sahitaat eva uttara uttara   
tanmaatraat sva vishesha utpattih na kevalaat | Tathaa sati vaayvaadi   
bhoota visheshaanaam tat tat guna aadhikya ayogaat; kaarana   
kramena hi kaarye guna sambhava iti | Atra puraanaantara vachanam |   
\* Aakaasham shabda tanmaatram sparsha tanmaatram samaavishat |   
Roopam tathaa eva aavishatah shabda sparsha gunou ubhou | Shabdah   
sparshah cha roopam cha rasa maatram samaavishat | Tasmaat   
chaturgunaah ete visheshaah cha indriyagrahaah || ityaadi |*** The next element is created by the immediate *tanmaatra*, along with the previous *tanmaatraas*. For *agni, roopa tanmaatra*, along with the earlier *shabda * and *sparsha * are needed. If it is not so, if the previous *tanmaatraas * are not associated, it will not be possible. Because of this, *aakaasha * has only *shabda; vaayu * has *shabda * and *sparsha; agni * has got *shabda, sparsha * and *roopa; ap * has got *shabda, sparsha, roopa, rasa; **pruthivi * has got all the five including *gandha*. Whatever the cause has got, the effects will have that accordingly. There is a *pramaana * quoted from *Vaayu Puraana*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 41:*** ***Sparsha maatrah tu vai vaayuh roopamaatram samaavrunot |*** ***Jyotischaapi vikurvaanam rasamaatram sasarja ha ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sparsham iti | Jyotih roopa tanmaatram |*** This is about *agni*. From the *tanmaatra * only the next *utpatti * happens, and not by the element itself. 





 [[104]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 42:*** ***Sambhavanti tato ambhaamsi rasaadhaarana taani cha |*** ***Rasa maatraani cha ambhaamsi roopamaatram samaavrunot ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sambhavanti iti | Tato ambhaamsi - tatah rasa tanmaatraat poorva   
tanmaatra traya sahitaat |*** Though it is said that it is *rasa*, it is also associated with the previous three *tanmaatraas*. From these four, *ap * is created. *Ambhaamsi * is waters. The previous *tanmaatraas * enveloping this *tanmaatra * and the *vishesha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 43:*** ***Vikurvaanaani cha ambhaamsi gandha maatram sasarjire |*** ***Sanghaato jaayate tasmaat tasya gandho guno matah ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Vikurvaanaani iti | Ambhaamsi rasa tanmaatraani, sanghaatah   
bhoomih, samhata shabda aadi sarva gunakatvaat, tasmaat gandha   
tanmaatraat poorva tanmaatra chatushtaya sahitaat |*** The *ap * which is undergoing modification, creates *gandha tanmaatra*. From *gandha tanmaatra, pruthivi * is created. *Pruthivi * is said to be *sanghaata, bhoomi*. It is called *sanghaata * because it is collectivity of all the five qualities, *shabda, sparsha, roopa, rasa, gandha. Tasmaat * means, from the *gandha tanmaatra*, associated with the previous four *tanmaatraas, **pruthivi * is created. Its main quality is said to be *gandha*, and it has also the previous four qualities. 



 [[105]] The five elements are created from the *tanmaatraas. Aakaasha * itself will not create *vaayu*, but *aakaasha * will modify to *shabda tanmaatra*, and *vaayu * is created from *shabda tanmaatra. Vaayu * itself will not create *tejas*, but *vaayu * will modify to *roopa tanmaatra*, and *tejas * is created from it. *Tanmaatraas * are the causes of the elements, they being assisted by the previous *tanmaatraas*. 



There are other views. One view is that *aakaasha * will get modified into *sparsha tanmaatra * and *vaayu*. But ultimately, *Paramaatman * being the *upaadaana * and *nimitta kaarana * of everything, and *antaryaami * of everything, everything culminates in Him. He is the sole creator of everything. There is a *pramaana * that *Adbhyo agnih, agni * is created from water, in *Taittiriya Aranyaka*. Whereas in the *srushti prakarana*, it says *agneraapah*, that *ap * is created from *agni*. The *pramaana * from *Taittiriya Aranyaka * is to be taken as *vyashti srushti * and not *samashti srushti*. For example, lightning is said to have water as its cause - from the water carrying cloud, lightning is created. 



The first element *aakaasha * has *shabda * as quality. Second element *vaayu * has got *shabda * and *sparsha * as qualities. Third element *tejas * is created from *roopa tamnaatra*, has *shabda, sparsha, roopa * as qualities. *Ap * is created from *rasa tanmaatra*, it is associated with the previous three *tanmaatraas*, and has got four qualities. The final element, *pruthivi*, is created from *gandha tanmaatra*, and is associated with *shabda, sparsha, **roopa, rasa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 44:*** ***Tasmin tasmin tu tanmaatram tena tanmaatrataa smrutaa ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[106]] ***Tasmin iti | Tasmin vyomaadou vishesha rahita shabda sparsha aadi   
guna maatram; tena tasmin tattve tanmaatrataa |*** In *aakaasha, vaayu, agni, ap, pruthivi*, only those *tanmaatraas * which are not having those qualities manifest. *Gunaas * are there, but they are subdued, and not manifest. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 45:*** ***Tanmaatraani avisheshaani avisheshaah tato hi te ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tat eva aaha tanmaatraani iti | Avisheshaani vishesha rahitaani; tatah   
tena, te shabda aadayoh avishesha sangyaah |*** These *tanmaatraas * are told as *avisheshaas*. They are not having the *visheshaas * manifest in them. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 46:*** ***Na shaantaa na api ghoraah te na moodhaah cha avisheshinah |*** ***Bhoota tanmaatra sargo ayam ahamkaaraat tu taamasaat ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Vishesha shabda artham vyaakurvan tat tat bhaava vishesham aaha na   
shaantaa iti | Avisheshinah shaanta ghora moodhaakhya triguna janya   
vishesha rahitatvaat avisheshinah | Uktam bhoota sargam nigamayati   
bhoota tanmaatra iti | Bhootaanaam tanmaatraanaam cha sargah   
ahamkaaraat tu taamasaat | Ayam ukta kramena, na tu   
avyavadhaanena | Kechit, \* aatmaana aakaashaat sambhootah,   
aakaashaat vaayuh \* ityaadi shruti darshanaat aakaasha aadi bhoota *** [[107]] ***visheshaanaam poorva poorvam prati prakrutitvam aahuh | Tat \*   
ashtou prakrutayah shodasha vikrutaya iti shruti viruddham | Teshaam   
api prakrutitve prakruteenaam aadhikyam vikruteenaam nyoonatvam   
cha syaat | Tasmaat \* ashtou prakrutaya ityaadi shruti virodhena \*   
aatmaana aakaashah \* ityaadi shruteh iti taih artho vyaakhyeyah |   
Vyaakhyaatah cha adhatastaat asmaabhireva poorva poorvam   
tanmaatram sva vishesham uttarottara tanmaatram cha utpaadayati iti   
aachakshaanaih | \* Pruthivyaa oshadhayah \* iti oshadhi vikrutitve api   
pruthivyaah na tattva prakrutitvam iti avirodhah | Tasmaat ukta   
prakaara eva srushti kramah |*** Now, the explanation of the *vishesha * is given. *Tanmaatraas * are said to be *avishesha*, and elements are said to be *vishesha. Sattva, rajas, tamas*, give rise to the qualities of *shanta, ghora * and *moodha *- peaceful or quiet, frightful; these qualities are not seen in the *tanmaatraas * and hence are called *avisheshaas*. With this, the creation of the elements is concluded. The elements and their respective *tanmaatraas*, are all created from *taamasa ahamkaara*. This is in the order that is told, and not just directly. There are some statements that say that from *aakaasha * only, *vaayu * is created, from *vaayu * only *agni * is created, etc., this is opposed to what is told in the *shrutis*, that there are only eight causes and sixteen effects. *Sri Engal Aalwaan * says that even he has commented that *aakaasha * comes from *shabda tanmaatra * only, and from there, *sparsha tanmaatra * comes, etc. and the order has to be like that. *Shruti * also says that from *pruthivi*, trees are all created. When *prakruti * modifies into trees, *pruthivi * is not the cause of *tattvaas*; so there is no *virodha * there. For example, *vaayu * is not counted as a cause, but *sparsha tanmaatra * is counted as a cause. But, if *pruthivi * becomes a cause for the trees, is this not opposed to the *shrutis*, means, *pruthivi * is not the cause of any *tattva*. There is no contradiction here, as this happens in *vyashti srushti * only. Therefore, what is told here is the order in which is has to be accepted. 





Now, the creation of indriyaas is going to be told.  [[108]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 47:*** ***Tejasaani indriyaani aahuh devaa vaikaarikaa dasha |*** ***Ekaadasham manah cha atra devaa vaikaarikaah smrutaah ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Taijasaani iti | Raajasaahamkaara kaaryaani indriyaani iti kechit   
aahuh | Devaah - manassahitaani dashendriyaani, vaikaarikaah   
saatvika ahamkaara kaaryaani iti apare | Sva paksham aaha - atra   
devaa iti | Indriyaanaam deva shabda vaachyatvam tat adhishtaatru   
devataa abhipraayena | Taijasa ahamkaarah tu vaikaarika taamasayoh   
sva kaarya karane pravartakah, sattva tamasoh kevalam \* rajah   
pravartakam tatra iti vaayu ukteh | Ahamkaarasya indriyaani prati   
nimittatvam eva, bhootaanaam eva upaadaanatvam \* annamayam hi   
somya manah aapomayah praanah tejomayee vaak \* ityaadi shruteh iti   
kechit aahuh, tat ayuktam | Ahamkaarasya eva upaadaanatve api   
bhootaanaam aapyaayakatvena api tathaa nirdesha upapatteh | Ayam   
atra indriyasya srushti kramah vaikaarika ahamkaaraat kramena   
shabda tanmaatra aadi pancha sahaayaat kramena shrotraadi   
jnyaanendriya panchakasya srushtih, tasmaat eva tat sahaayaat vaak   
aadi karmendriya panchakasya srushtih, asahayaat tu tasmaat   
manasah srushtih iti |*** From *vaikaarika ahamkaara*, which is *saatvika ahamkaara*, the *indriyaas * are created, assisted by *taijasa, raajasa ahamkaara*. But some people say that from *raajasa ahamkaara * itself, the *indriyaas * are created; *Paraasharar * says that this is not his view, and is not acceptable to him. The *indriyaas * are told as *devaah. Bhagavaan * is there with the *indriyaas * always, but they never know Him. *Paraasharar's paksha * is that they are from *saatvika ahamkaara*. For every *indriya*, there is an *adhishtaatru devataa*, who is presiding over it, and controlling the functions; *indriyaas * are all *achetanaas*, and have an *devataa. Raajasa ahamkaara*, which is called *taijasa * here, only assists *saatvika ahamkaara * and *taamasa ahamkaara * in their respective creations. This is also told clearly in *Vaayu Puraana * also. It is discussed at  [[109]] one place that *manas * is made of *anna*, which is *pruthivi*; this view is not correct. 



The *raajasa ahankaara* only assists *saatvika* and *taamasa ahankaaras* is told in *Vaayu purana*. Another view is also discussed and refuted here: some say that *ahankaara tattva* is only *nimitta kaarana* \(efficient cause\) of *indriyas* and *bhutas* \(elements\) only are *upaadaana kaarana* \(material cause\). They quote the *Upanishat vakya – ‘anna mayam hi somya manah aapomayah **praanah tejomayee vaak*’. But that is not correct. Because *annamayam* means here anna is *apyaayaka* to *manas* \(that is food is appealing or causes happiness to mind\). So *ahankaara* is only *upaadaana kaarana* and *bhutas* are only *aapyaayakas*. The order of creation of *indriyas* is like this: from *vaikaarika ahankaara* \(or *saatvika ahankaara*\) in order with the help of five *tanmaatras* starting with *shabda tanmaatra*, the five *jnaanendriyas – shabda* and others are created. From *vaikaarika ahankaara* itself with the help of five *tanmaatras* again *vaak* and other five *karmendriyaas* are created. *Manas* is created directly from *vaikaarika ahankaara* only \(without the help of *tanmaatras*\). 



*Saatvika ahamkaara* is only the cause of all the eleven *indriyaas*. This is the *siddhaanta * told by *Sri Engal Aalwaan*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 48:*** ***Tvak chakshur naasikaa jihvaa shrotram atra cha panchamam |*** ***Shabdaadeenaam avaaptyartham buddhiyuktaani vai dvija ||*** The five *indriyaas * are told - *tvak * is sense of touch, *chakshuh *- sight, *naasikaa *- sense of smell, *jihvaa *- sense of taste, *shrotram *- sense of hearing. These are the five *jnyaanendriyaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[110]] ***Tvak iti | Avaaptyartham - pumso vishaya jnyaanartham | Buddhi   
yuktaani tvak aadeeni vishaya jnyaana artham bhavanti iti sheshah |   
Atra buddhi shabdena antahkaranasya grahanam | Atra shloke kramo   
na vivakshitah | *** *Avaaptyartham * means for the person to get the knowledge of the sense objects like *shabda, sparsha, roopa, rasa, gandha*. These sense organs generate the knowledge; when we hear a sound, the organ of hearing generates a knowledge about what is heard; for sensing the objects of the sense organs. How the organs help the *chetana * or person to get the knowledge, is through the mind, *antahkarana*. Mind is the channel for all these. Everything is coming through the mind. *Aatman * connects to the mind; mind connects to the external sense organ, and that connects to the object; this is how it is perceived; and through the mind, it gets conveyed back to the *aatman*. Mind is the channel in between the sense organ and the *aatman*. In this *shloka*, the order is not as told. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 49:*** ***Paayu upasthou karou paadou vaak cha maitreya panchamee |*** ***Visarga shilpa gati ukti karma teshaam cha kathyate ||*** This is about the five *karmendriyaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Paayu iti | Paayoh vidvisargah, upasthasya mootra retoh visargah |   
Visarga shilpa gati ukti iti dvandvaikavat bhaavaat napumsakatvam |*** *Paayu * is the organ of excretion, *upastha * is for urination and procreation. Hands, legs and speech. *Visarga * is for throwing out, *shilpa * is for procreation. *Gati * is for movement, and *ukti * is for speech. These are the actions performed by the organs of action. 





 [[111]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 50:*** ***Aakaasha vaayu tejaamsi salilam pruthivi tathaa |*** ***Shabda aadibhih gunaih brahman samyuktaani uttarottarih ||*** *Aakaasha, vaayu, tejas *\(fire\), water, earth - they have got *shabda, sparsha, **roopa, rasa, gandha*, in the order of increasing qualities. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Atha anda srushtyartham bhootaanaam pancheekaranam aaha   
aakaasha iti | Atra aakaashaadayah shabdaah bhoota vishesha paraah   
| Uttarottaraih - uttarottara atra uttaraih adhikaih ityarthah | Etat   
uktam bhavati - aakaashaadeeni mahaa bhootaani uttaratrottaratra   
vaayu aadou adhikaih shabdaadibhih gunaih vishishtaani parasparam   
yuktaani militaani; tena aakaasha vaayuh dvigunah tejah trigunam   
aapah chaturgunaah pruthivi pancha guna iti |*** *Aakaasha * has got one quality - *shabda. Vaayu * has got two qualities -*shabda * and *sparsha. Tejas * has got *shabda, sparsha, roopa*. 



From this *shloka * onwards, in order to tell how the *anda*, the Cosmic Egg is created, this is going to be told. *Pancheekarana*, the mixing of the five elements in a particular way, is going to be told. *Aakaasha * has got only one *guna, shabda. Vaayu * has got two *gunaas - shabda * and *sparsha. Tejas * has got three *gunaas - shabda, sparsha, roopa*. Water has got four *gunaas - **shabda, sparsha, roopa, rasa; ap shabda * is always in *bahu **vachana*. *Pruthivi * has got five qualities - *shabda, sparsha, roopa, rasa, **gandha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 51:*** ***Shaantaah ghoraah cha moodhaah cha visheshaah tena te smrutaah ||***  [[112]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Shaantaa iti | Tena parasparam melanena, pratyekam visheshaah   
shaantaah ghoraah moodhaah | Svatah shaante bhoomi jale, ghorou   
tejo anilou, moodhah aakaashah, melanaat sarve shaanta ghora   
moodhaah | Ayam atra pancheekarana prakaarah - aakaashasya ekam   
ardham aakaashatvena sthitam | Anyasmin ardhe chaturdhaa krute   
vaayu aadi chaturbheda bhoota praveshah, evam bhootaantaro api |   
Uktam hi \* evam jaateshu bhootaani pratyekam syuh dvidhaa tatah |   
Chaturdhaa bhinnam ekaikam ardham ardham tathaa sthitam | Vyomni   
ardha bhaagah chatvaaro vaayu tejah payo bhuvaam | Ardhaani yaani   
vaayostu vyoma tejah payo bhuvaam | Ityaadi |*** By mixing, each one has got these three qualities - quiet and peaceful \( *shaanta*\), frightful or fearful \( *ghora*\), and causing delusion \( *moodha*\). *Pruthivi * and *ap *- are said to be *shaanta. Tejas * and *vaayu * are said to be *ghora. Aakaasha * is said to be *moodha*. When they are all mixed up, all of them have got all the three qualities. For example, if the *aakaasha * element is taken, and made into two parts - one half of it is remaining as *aakaasha*; if the second half of *aakaasha * is made into four parts, those four parts are filled with one part of *vaayu*, one part of *tejas*, one part of *ap*, one part of *pruthivi*. So, *aakaasha * is 50 percent *aakaasha*, and 12.5 percent each of *vaayu, tejas, ap, pruthivi*. Similarly with *vaayu, **tejas, ap, pruthivi*. This is called *pancheekarana prakriyaa*. The *Brahma **Sutraas * say that this is done directly by *Paramaatman *- it is told as *trivrutkarana*, which is same as *pancheekarana. Paramaatman * only does this, as *Chaturmukha Brahma * is not yet created. This is directly done by *Paramaatman*, during *srushti*, after *praakruta pralaya*. After *pancheekarana*, if we see the *aakaasha*, it has got 50 percent of *aakaasha*, and 12.5 percent of the remaining four. It is still called *aakaasha*, as it has abundance of *aakaasha*. All the elements have got all the other elements also, in part. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 52:***  [[113]] ***Naanaa veeryaah pruthak bhootaah tatah te samhatim vinaa |*** ***Naashaknuvan prajaah srashtum asamaagamya krutsnashah ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Atha anda utpatti artham mahat aadeenaam paraspara aatmakatvam   
iti aaha naanaa veeryaa iti | Naanaa veeryatvam ati drava ati   
kathinatva aadikam | Samhatim vinaa melanam vinaa, ata eva   
asamaagamya samityekeebhaave ekatvam apraapya | Prajaa grahana   
mandasya api upalakshanaartham |*** *Naanaa veeryatva * is is being too much of liquid, or being too hard. *Sammatim vinaa * means without getting mixed up in this proportion told. Without getting mixed up in this proportion, it was not possible to do any creation. When they are separate, they have different qualities. When they are mixed in this proportion, they have the proper qualities. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 53:*** ***Sameti anyonya samyogam paraspara samaashrayaah |*** ***Eka sanghaata lakshyaah cha sampraapya aikyam asheshatah ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sametyeti | Sametya paraspara samaashrayaat anyonya samyogam   
samslesham sametya, anantaram asheshata aikyam praapya, eka   
sanghaata lakshyaah eka sanghaata veekshakaah, chaturvidha ananta   
prajaa nirantara andotpaadana tatparaah | Paathaantare ekah   
sanghaatah andam lakshya saadhyam yeshaam te eka sanghaata   
lakshyaah | Yat vaa eka sanghaata lakshyaah eka sanghaata iti   
drushyaah |***  [[114]] Getting mixed up like this, after that, becoming one as though there is no difference, the purpose of all this is to create the Cosmic Egg. All these were used to create, continuously without break, the four types of beings \( *deva, manushya, tiryak, sthaavara*\). From *pradhaana * or *moola prakruti*, it becomes *mahat, ahamkaara, tanmaatraas, pancha bhootaas, indriyaas*, and then *pancheekarana *- all these are done to create the Cosmic Egg, and then the beings. Afterwards, they will be seen like one unit, which is *anda, **Brahmaanda*, Cosmic Egg. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 54:*** ***Purusha adhisthitatvaat cha avyakta anugrahena cha |*** ***Mahat aadyaa visheshaantaa hi anda utpaadayanti te ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Purusha adhisthitatvaat iti | Purusha adhisthitatvaat punya paapa   
parishvakta jeeva anupravishtatvaat | Avyakta anugrahena anugraho   
anupraveshah, beejasya tvak anugrahena ankuraarambhavat,   
aapyaayakatvam vaa |*** *Purusha adhisthitatvaat * means being presided over by the *chetana*, one who has the *punya, paapa * and these *karmaas*. Depending on the *punya * and *p* aapa, the *jeeva * does *anupravesha. **Paramaatman * makes *jeeva * enter into a body, and He also enters as *antaryaami*. Just as the seed has got the outer skin, and from there, the sprout comes up, the *avyakta * is also similarly combined with the *jeevaatman*; or it is for making the *jeeva* experience the pleasures and pains. 



*Vishesha * is the *pancha bhootaas * with the qualities manifested after *pancheekarana*. Beginning from *mahat*, up to the *indriyaas * and *pancha **bhootaas*, they ultimately result in creation of the Cosmic Egg.  [[115]] 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 55:*** ***Tat kramena vivruddham sat jala budbudhavat samam |*** ***Bhootebho andam mahaa buddhe bruhat tat udakeshayam |*** ***Praakrutam brahma roopasya vishnoh sthaanam anuttamam ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tat iti | Samam samatvam, andasya andasya hi bhityaadi   
avayavaanaam sama kaalatvam jala budbudavat | Anena asthairyam   
cha soochitam | Bhootaanaam eva praadhaanyam iti aaha bhootebhya   
iti | Brahma roopasya praakrutam iti visheshanaabhyaam sva   
asaadhaaranam divya roopam apraakrutam sthaanam cha asti iti   
soochitam |*** This Cosmic Egg keeps growing gradually, similar to how the bubbles and foam are formed in the water. From the *pancha bhootaas*, the *anda * keeps growing, and it is residing in water. This is supposed to be *praakruta **sthaana*, in the form of Brahma; this means that there is an *apraakruta **sthaana * also. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 56:*** ***Tatra avyakta svaroopa asou vyakta roopo jagat patih |*** ***Vishnuh brahma svaroopena svayam eva vyavasthitah ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Anda bhoktaa chaturmukha eva katham vishnoh sthaanam iti uchyate |   
Iti atra aaha - tatra iti | Avyaktam pradhaanam, vuaktam mahat aadi,   
asou svayam eva pradhaana aadi purusha apadeshena sthitah, \* etou *** [[116]] ***dvou vibudha sreshthou prasaada krodhajou smrutou | Tadaa darshita   
panthaanou srushti samhaara kaarakou | Nimitta maatram taavatra \*   
iti bhaarata vachanaat |*** How *Chaturmukha Brahma * is told to be *Vishnu's sthaanam*, the *praakruta **sthaana * of *Vishnu*, is told here. He is only present as *avyakta*, He is only present as *mahat. Mahat shareeraka Vishnu * becomes *ahamkaara shareeraka **Vishnu; ahamkaara shareeraka Vishnu * becomes *tanmaatra shareeraka **Vishnu; Paramaatman * is always there as inner self, otherwise, they cannot change by themselves, as they are all inert matter, *prakruti*. He is only said to be *pradhaana, purusha*. Two knowledgeable persons, were born of *prasaada * and *krodha*, the grace *Bhagavaan*, and out of His anger; *Chaturmukha Brahma * is born out of His grace, and out of His anger, *Rudra * is born; they act only guided by *Paramaatman*; being guided by *Paramaatman * only, they get to be the creators and destroyers; they are only the *nimitta * in this. If *Paramaatman * is not *antaryaami*, they cannot even act. That is why it is told that *Paramaatman * is Himself standing as *pradhaana, purusha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 57:*** ***Meruh ulbam abhoot tasya jaraayuh cha maheedharaah |*** ***Garbhodakam samudraah cha tasya aasan sumahaatmanah ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Meruh ityaadi | Tasya brahmanah ulbam garbha veshtana maamsam,   
tat veshtanam jaraayuh, garbhaashayah, uttaram vaa \* ulbaanjaraayuh   
\* iti shruteh | Sva deha bhoota brahmaanda avayava bhootah meru   
aadibhih sahito hiranya garbhah samavartatagre ityarthah | \* Hiranya   
garbhah samavartataagre \* iti shruteh |*** *Meru parvata * became the muscles and flesh that are surrounding the womb of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, the sac covering it, is said to be all the mountains. Oceans became the liquid in the womb. *Meru * and other *parvataas * are parts  [[117]] of the Cosmic Egg, which is the body of *Paramaatman*. With all these things, *Hiranyagarbha * was existing at the time of creation. The quote is from *Hiranyagarbha Sookta*, which says that *Hiranyagarbha * was there in the beginning, which is *Paramaatman * only. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 58:*** ***Saadri dveepa samudraah cha sajyotih loka sangrahah |*** ***Tasmin ande abhavat vipra sa deva asura maanushah ||*** The mountains, islands, oceans, planetary orbits, collection of all the worlds, everything was existing in this Cosmic Egg, along with all the *devaas, asuraas, manushyaas*, O Maitreya. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yat brahmanaa saha srushtam yat cha brahmanaa srushtam tat sarvam   
tasmin anda eva iti aaha - saadree iti | Sa jyotih - jyotih chakrasahitah   
| Loka sangrahah - loka samoohah |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 59:*** ***Vaari vanhi anila aakaashaih tato bhootaadinaa bahih |*** ***Vrutam dasha gunaih andam bhootaadih mahataa tathaa ||*** Outside of this Cosmic Egg, what was there is told. *Bhootaadi * is *taamasa **ahamkaara*. Water, fire, *vaayu, aakaasha*, and *taamasa ahamkaara*, all these were existing, each ten times. The Cosmic Egg was covered by all these, each ten times. And the *taamasa ahamkaara * was covered by *mahat **tattva*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[118]] ***Vaari ityaadi | Dasha gunaih - dasha gunottaraih |*** Each one is ten times the previous one. There were multiple layers, each ten times more than the inner layer, surrounding the Cosmic Egg. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 60:*** ***Avyaktena aavruto brahman taih sarvaih sahito mahaan |*** ***Ebhih aavaranaih andam saptabhih praakrutaih vrutam |*** ***Naarikela phalasya antar beejam baahya dalaih iva ||*** Like this, seven *praakruta vastus*, five *bhootaas, ahamkaara, mahat*, surrounding the *anda*, were present. It was covered by seven layers. All these were covered by *avyakta*, the *pradhaana*. Just like the coconut which has got multiple layers of covering, and inside is the essence. In the same way, this *anda * was covered by the seven *tattvaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Avyaktena iti | Praakrutaih iti anena prakruteh api lakshanayaa   
grahanam, chatreeti nyaayaat |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 61:*** ***Jushan rajo gunam tatra svayam vishveshvaro harih |*** ***Brahmaa bhootvaa asya jagato visrushtou sampravartate ||*** The quality of *rajas * being high at the time of creation, *Paramaatman * who is *antaryaami * of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, *Chaturmukha Brahma's rajas * gets increased, and he starts to act and start creation. Effects of *guna **vashyatva * are for *Chaturmukha Brahma * and not for *Paramaatman*. 



 [[119]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Kshetrajnya buddhi poorvaka sargaadou kshetrajnya amshasya eva   
guna vashyatvam na tu vishnoh iti aaha jushan iti | Brahmaa bhootvaa   
rajo gunam jushan tatra api svayam vishveshvarah sarveshvaro na guna   
vashyah, api tu sva sankalpena kshetrajnyaan eva guna vashyaan karoti   
|*** Creation was done according to the *karmaas * of the *kshetrajnyaas*. According to their *karmaas*, they are associated with *prakruti; gunaas sattva, rajas, **tamas * have an effect on them. In this, the *guna vashyatva * is under the sway of *gunaas * of *prakruti*, is only for the *kshetrajnya amsha. Amsha amshi **bhaava * was told. *Kshetrajnya * is *visheshana amsha, **Paramaatman * is *visheshya amsha. Guna vashyatva * to the *gunaas * is only for the *kshetrajnya amsha*, which is *shareera * of *Paramaatman. Paramaatman * is not affected by this, and He has no role in this. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 62:*** ***Srushtam hi paati anuyugam yaavat kalpa vikalpanaa |*** ***Sattvabhrut bhagavaan vishnuh aprameya paraakramah ||*** *Kalpa vikalpanaa * are the *Brahma ahah vyavahaarah*, the days and nights of *Brahma. Anda * is created, and *Chaturmukha Brahma * is created; he starts to act further, *Paramaatman * is always his *antaryaami*. All the things created are protected and nurtured in every *yuga*, as long as the days and nights of *Brahma * are going on. One who is supporting everything, *Bhagavaan **Vishnu*, unparalleled valour. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Srushtam iti | Kalpa vikalpanaa brahma ahar vyavahaarah |   
Sattvabhrut - sattvam apraakrutam shuddha sattva gunam bibharti iti   
sattvabhrut, \* gunaaadi doshaam cha mune vyateetah, \* iti ukteh | Kim   
cha \* sattvaadayo na santeeshe yatra cha praakrutaa gunaah | Na hi *** [[120]] ***tasya gunaah sarve sarvaih muni ganaih api | Vaktum shakyaa   
viyuktasya sattva aadyaih akhilaih gunaih | Ityaadibhyah |*** *Sattvabhrut * means that He also supports the *apraakruta shuddha **sattva * also, which is *Parama Pada*. He is beyond the defects of *guna * and others. *Praakruta sattva, rajas, tamas gunaas * are not there in *Paramaatman*. These qualities, the entire host of sages cannot praise or sing or understand, because they are all far away from *sattva, rajas, tamas*. 



We will take up the further *shlokaas * in the next session. We saw how the *indriyaas * are created, and *pancheekarana * is done, mixing up of the *pancha bhootaas * in the right proportion, and how creation cannot continue without this, then the creation of the *anda*, Cosmic Egg, then *Chaturmukha Brahma*, and further creation by *Chaturmukha Brahma*, with *Paramaatman * as *antaryaami*. This was told as ' *Jagat cha sah*'. Everything is *shareera * of *Paramaatman*, and changes that are happening are in His *shareera. Paramaatman * remains unaffected, and immutable. 



We have so far studied the second half of the second chapter of *Sri Vishnu **Puraanam*, where the creation of the *tattvaas*, the elements, and their mixing up called *pancheekarana kriyaa*, and then creation of the *brahmaanda*, Cosmic Egg, and *Chaturmukha Brahma*, were explained. How it is surrounded by seven *aavaranaas * was told. *Paramaatman*, being the *antaryaami*, creates according to the *karmaas * of the *chetanaas *- he gives them the respective *deha, indriyaas*, etc. He Himself remains untouched by all these. As long as the days and nights of *Chaturmukha **Brahma * are there, *Bhagavaan * protects all that is created. He also supports the *Nitya Vibhooti - shloka * 62 of *Amsha * 1, Chapter 2. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 63:*** ***Tamodreki cha kalpaante rudra roopi janaardanah |*** ***Maitreya akhila bhootaani bhakshayati ati bheeshanah ||***  [[121]] O Maitreya, at the end of the *kalpa, Bhagavaan Janaardana*, having increased *tamas*, taking the form of *Rudra*, being most ferocious, He eats up all the beings. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 64:*** ***Bhakshayitvaa cha bhootaani jagati eka arnaveekrute |*** ***Naaga paryanka shayane sheyate asou parameshvarah ||*** After eating up everything and withdrawing unto Himself, the whole world becomes one huge ocean, *Parameshvara * who is the Supreme Lord, He sleeps on the bed of *Aadishesha*; He does *yoga nidraa*. 



We say ' *Bhagavan pundareekaaksha shriyaa bhoomyaa cha neelayaa | Jagat **rakshana jaagaryaam yoga nidraam upaakuru ||* '. In order to be conscious of protecting the world, do *yoga nidraa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 65:*** ***Prabuddhascha punah srushtim karoti brahma roopadhruk ||*** Sleeping on the bed of *Aadishesha*, again, when He wakes up, He again does creation, taking on the form of *Chaturmukha Brahma*. 



*Chaturmukha Brahma * does the creation, but *Bhagavaan * being the *antaryaami * directs Him to do all that. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 66:*** ***Srushti sthiti antakaraneem brahma vishnu shivaatmikaam |*** ***Sa sanjyaam yaati bhagavaan eka eva janaardanah ||***  [[122]] *Bhagavaan Janaardana * Himself is called by the names *Brahma, **Vishnu * and *Shiva*, performing the acts of creation, sustenance and withdrawal. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Brahmaadeen apadishya teshu sthitvaa svayam eva srushtyaadikam   
karoti iti aaha srushteti | Srushti sthiti anta nimittaam brahma vishnu   
shivaatmikaam brahmaa vishnuh shiva iti evam roopaam samjnyaam tat   
roopo bhagavaan eva yaati iti arthah | Sarga sthiti antakaranaam iti   
vaktavye deepo prayogah aarshatvaat saadhuh | Yat vaa karmani   
vyutpattayaa samjnyaayamaanaa samjnyaatva avasthaa uchyate |   
Tathaa cha sargaadi kriyaa saadhana bhootaam brahma aadi   
aatmikaam avasthaam yaati iti arthah | Karaneem iti karoteh karane   
lyut pratyayah |*** Being the *antaryaami * of Brahma, He does creation. Being the *antaryaami * of *Shiva*, He does *samhaara*, withdrawal. Taking on the *avataara * of *Vishnu*, He does sustenance. The forms responsible for creation, sustenance and end of the world, *Bhagavaan * having them as His *shareera*, controlling them and making them do all the acts, He only does everything, and everything culminates in Him ultimately. Here is a grammatical item mentioned, this is told by a *rishi*, so we have to accept it. Or, the means to the acts of creation, sustenance, etc. - those states of *Brahma, Vishnu * and *Shiva - Bhagavaan * only takes them. Cause and effect - effect is *avasthaantaraapatti * of *kaarana*; another state of the cause. *Bhagavaan * only is the cause and the effect. The modifications and changes are in His body, and in His nature, there is no change. There are changes in His *shareera*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 67:*** ***Srashtaa srujati cha aatmaanam vishnuh paalyam cha paati cha |*** ***Upasamhriyate cha ante samhartaa cha svayam prabhuh ||***  [[123]] He creates Himself. He only protects Himself. And He withdraws unto Himself at the end. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tadvat srujya paalya samhaarya ananta vastu antareshu samjyaantara   
abhidheyatayaa vartate iti aaha - srashteti | Srashtaaram brahmaanam   
srujyam cha daksha aadi ganam, samhartaaram rudram, samhaaryam   
cha trailokyam, yugapat nirdishya tat roopatva vidhaanaat srujya   
samhaarya bhootaat vastunah srashtru samhartoh na vishesha iti   
pradarshanam asmin shloke abhipretam | Tasya kshetrajnya karma   
anugunam guna niyantrutvam eva na bhoktrutvam iti aaha - svayam   
prabhuh iti |*** In the same way, the created, protected, that which is destroyed, unlimited beings, objects, being inside all of them, He Himself is present taking on different names. What is told in this *shloka * is that - *Brahma * the creator, *Daksha * and others who are created, *Rudra * who is the destroyer, the three worlds which are destroyed, addressing them at the same time; there is no difference between the creator and created, the destroyer and the destroyed, because such form is being told. He creates *Chaturmukha **Brahma*, and being his *antaryaami*, creates everything. He protects being *Vishnu*, and destroys being *Rudra*. But, He is not attached to any of these. All the creations happen according to the *karmaas * of *kshetrajnyaas*. He controls the *guna niyantrutva*; the *sattva, rajas, tamas * becoming more or less. When *sattva * is more, *jnyaana pravrutti * happens; when *rajas * is more, there is a lot of action, desire; when *tamas * is more, there is ignorance, sleep. All this happens in the *kshetrajnya * according to his *karma*. The qualities keep varying, being associated with *prakruti*. The *kshetrajnya * experiences various things because of this. Everything happens according to *karma * of *kshetrajnya*, and *Bhagavaan * does not have any enjoyership, *bhoktrutva*. This is explained by the word *svayam prabhuh*; He remains the Lord. Everything is happening in His *shareera * and not in Himself. There is no change in His nature, though He remains *antaryaami * and controls and supports everything.  [[124]] 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 68:*** ***Pruthivi aapah tathaa tejo vaayuh aakaasha eva cha |*** ***Sarvendriya antahkaranam purushaakhyam hi yat jagat ||*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 69:*** ***Sa eva sarva bhootaatatmaa vishva roopa yato avyayah |*** ***Sarga aadikam tu tasya eva bhootastham upakaarakam ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Uktasya sarvataadaamyasya hetum adhyaayaadou uktam punarapi   
darshayati - pruthivyaapa iti | Evam bhootam yat jagat tat sa eva iti   
uttaratra anvayah |*** What is told here is whatever was told at the beginning of this chapter, that is identity with everything. It was told *jagat cha sah*, He was identified with everything. This world, consisting of *pruthivi, ap, tejas, vaayu, aakaasha*, all the *indriyaas, antahkarana*, and then the *chetanaas*, sentients - is He only. 



He is *sarva bhoota aatma*, inner controller of all beings. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tatra hetuh sa eva iti | Sarva bhoota aatmaa vishva roopo yata iti -   
sarva bhootaanaam ayam aatmaa vishvam cha asya shareeram iti   
yatah, atah sarvam sa eva iti | Tato brahma aadi bhootastham sarga   
aadikam leelaa avataara roopinah asya eva upakaarakam | Yathaa   
shareera vyaapaaraah shareerino jeevasya iva |***  [[125]] He is present as the entire world. *Roopa * is *shareera*. Entire world is His *shareera*, controlled by Him, subservient to Him, being supported by Him. He is *vishva roopa*. He is immutable, unchanging. He is the self of all the beings, the entire world is His *shareera*. Because of this, He is only everything. Creation, sustenance, destruction are all His acts only. *Leela * is all His mere sport; when He is doing creation, sustenance, etc., He is engaged in sport; it is all useful for *Bhagavaan * only, who has taken *leelaa **avataara*. Just as all activities and functions of our body are useful to the *aatman * inside. Just like this, creation, sustenance, destruction are all useful to the *Paramaatman * only. It is *upakaaraka * to Him, who is *shareeri*, and it is all mere sport. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 2, Shloka 70:*** ***Sa eva srujyah sa cha sarga kartaa sa eva paatyatti cha paalyate cha |*** ***Brahma aadi avasthaabhih ashesha moortih vishnuh varishtho varado   
varenyah ||*** He is the created, and He is only the creator, He only protects, He eats up also, He also the protected one. He takes all forms such as Brahma and others, He is the Supreme, He is the one who grants all boons, He is the one to be chosen. 



*Atti cha adyate cha *- He only eats, and He is being eaten. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Uktam artham nigamayati - sa eva iti | Ashesha moortih - srushti aadi   
kartuh svasya eva srujyatvaadi upasaadhanam ashesha moortih iti |   
Brahmaadeenaam kutah srushtrutvaadikam tatra aaha - varada iti |   
Ayam aashritebhyo brahma aadibhyah srushtrutvaadi vara pradah, \*   
tad aadarshitapanthaanou srushti samhaara kaarakou, \* mayaa eva ete *** [[126]] ***nihataah, \* ityaadeh | Atra aadyate chetadhyaahaaryam | Varenyah -   
varaneeyah |*** Whatever was told is concluded here. The one who does the acts of creation and others, He is only being created. He only is present in all forms. How can creation and others be attributed to Brahma and others - this is possible because He grants all boons. He gives them the power to do creation, but He being *antaryaami*. Brahma and others who have taken refuge in Him, He gives the boons. The way of creation is being taught to Brahma and others, by *Paramaatman * only. Because of being shown how to do it, they become the creators or destroyers. Krishna says to Arjuna that 'I have already killed everyone, you are only an instrument'. *Atti - adyate cha | Paati - paalyate **cha | Srujya - sarga kartaa cha | * 



What was started as *jagat cha sah*, in this process, the entire creation was told, *pancheekarana, samashti srushti, vyashti srushti*, creation of Brahma and others, and through them doing everything, that it is all His different forms only, was told. Because He does *anupravesha * only, any *vastu * gets *vastutva*; otherwise it cannot even exist. He supports everything. He controls everything, and everything is meant for His purpose. He does creation according to the *karmaas * of the *kshetrajnyaas*. Creation is mere sport for Him. He only creates Himself and protects Himself. He withdraws unto Himself. Entire world is Him only. All these are real entities only. Because He is existing as *antaryaami*, all the words in the ultimate sense connote *Paramaatman * only. 



This concludes the Second Chapter. 



***|| Iti shri Vishnu Puraane prathame amshe sviteeyo adhyaayah ||*** 



 [[127]] ***|| Iti shri Bhagavat bhaashyakaara charana nalinaantaranga shri   
vishnu chitta virachite shri vishnu puraana vyaakhyaane prathama   
amshe dviteeyo adhyaayhah ||*** This concludes the second chapter of First *Amsha * of *Sri Vishnu Puraana **Vyaakhyaana*, written by *Sri Vishnu Chitta*, who is dancing in the holy feet of *Sri Bhaashyakaarar*. He is inside the Lotus Feet of *Sri Bhaashyakaarar*. 



***|| Atha Triteeyo Adhyaayah ||*** 


