+++
title = "04"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 1: *** ***Maitreya uvaacha:*** ***Brahmaa naaraayanaakhyo asou kalpaadou bhagavaan yathaa |*** ***Sasarja sarva bhootaani tat aachakshva mahaamune ||*** O great sage. This Brahma who is known as *Naaraayana*, at the beginning of the *kalpa*, how he created all the beings, please do tell me that. 





## 2
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 2: *** ***Sri Paraasharah:*** ***Prajaah sasarja bhagavaan brahmaa naaraayanaatmakah |*** ***Prajaapati patih devo yathaa tat me nishaamaya ||***  [[153]] The Lord *Prajaapati, Chaturmukha Brahma*, who has *Bhagavaan * as the inner self, the way he created all beings, listen from me. 





## 3
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 3: *** ***Ateeta kalpa avasaane nishaa supto sthitah prabhuh |*** ***Sattvodriktah tadaa brahmaa shoonyam lokam avaikshata ||*** At the end of the *kalpa * which just passed, he slept the whole night and then woke up. Having woken up, after the night, he was having excess of *sattva*, and saw the world which was totally empty. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Atha paadma kalpa kathaa vishayaat brahma proktaat paadma   
puraanaat anantaram vaaraaha kalpa vruttaanta vishayam idam   
vaishnavam puraanam iti darshayitum praak paraardha praaptam   
paadmam kalpam anoodya vaaraaha kalpa vruttaantam prastouti -   
ateeta kalpa iti | Tathaa uktam maatsye - Etat eva cha vai braahmam   
paadme kalpe jagat hitam | Sarva bhootaatmakam yat tat paadmam iti   
uchyate budhaih | Vaaraaha kalpa vruttaantam adhikrutya   
paraasharah | Yaan praaha dharmaan akhilah tat uktam vaishnavam   
viduh || \* iti | Sattvodriktah bhagavat anupravesha atishayaat tasya   
eva vaaraahaadi avataara prasiddheh |*** Brahma told about the last *kalpa * of the first *paraardha*; this is called *Paadma Puraana*. What is taught by *Paraasharar * is about the *Vaaraaha kalpa*. To show that it is called *Vaishnava Puraana*, he starts to talk about *Varaaha kalpa*. What is told by Brahma is called *Braahma **Puraana*; it was told for the good of the whole world; that is *Paadma **Puraana*. All the things which happened in the *Vaaraaha Kalpa*, whatever *Paraashara * has told, all *dharmaas * told, that is *Vaishnava Puraana. **Bhagavaan * has done *anupravesha*, and *Bhagavaan * is well known for His *avataara, Varaaha*.  [[154]] 



In this fourth chapter, *Varaaha avataara* is going to be told. 





## 4
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 4: *** ***Naaraayanah paro achintyah pareshaam api sa prabhuh |*** ***Brahma svaroopi bhagavaan anaadih sarva sambhavah ||*** *Brahma * who woke up from sleep, with excess *sattva*, he saw the world which was empty, and He is *Naaraayana, para*, Supreme, beyond out thinking, lord of all, He Himself is present as *Brahma*, beginningless, cause of everything. 



We get a doubt here whether *Brahma * and *Naaraayana * have *svaroopa aikya*. This is made clear here. 





## 5
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 5: *** ***Imam cha udaaharanti atra shlokam naaraayanam prati |*** ***Brahma svaroopinam devam jagatah prabhavaapyayam ||*** This *shloka * is being told about *Naaraayana*. The Lord who is present in the form of Brahma, and who is the cause of creation and destruction of the world. *Manu * and others tell this. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** ***Atra brahma naaraayanayoh svaroopa aikya shankaayaam manu   
aadayoh tayoh bheda param naaraayana vishayam shlokam   
udaaharanti iti aaha imam cha iti |***  [[155]] *Manu * and others have told *shlokaas * which clearly mention that *Chaturmukha Brahma * and *Naaraayana * are different and distinct. 





## 6
This *shloka* is from *Manu Smruti*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 6: *** ***Aapo naaraa iti proktaa aapo vai narasoonavah |*** ***Ayanam tasya taah poorvam tena naaraayanah smrutah ||*** This is *shloka * about *Naaraayana * which clearly states that He is different and distinct from *Chaturmukha Brahma*. The waters are said to be *Naaraa*, and they are the progeny of *Nara*. They are the residing place for Him, He is said to be *Naaraayana*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** ***Tam eva shloka darshayati aapa iti | \* Praaduraaseet tamonudah \* iti   
prakruteh parama kaarana bhooto bhagavaan avinaashitvena nara iti   
uchyate | Tat srushtaa aapo naaraah | Ap shabdah srujya tattvaantara   
pradarshana parah, \* Naraat jaataani tattvaani naaraaneeti tato viduh   
| Taani eva cha ayanam tasya tena naaraayanah smrutah || ityaadi   
darshanaat | Asya ayanam anupravishtasya shareeram | \* Yat ambu   
vaishnavah kaayah \* iti vakshyati | Poorvam brahma srushteh praak |   
Kaarana bhoote bhagavati naaraayana shabda nirvachanaat tasya   
kaarya bhootaat brahmano bheda iti bhaavah |*** *Bhagavaan* is only said to be *Nara*. There is no *naasha*, therefore He is said to be *Nara*; He is the sole cause of everything. Whatever is created from Him are *naaraah*. Everything that is created is indicated by *ap shabda * here. Whatever was created from *Nara*, are all called *naara*, they are the resting place for Him. Because He is *antaryaami*, He is residing in everything as *antaryaami*. This is one of the *vyutpattis * for *Naaraayana **shabda * according to *Bahuvreehi samaasa. Naaraah ayanam yasya sah **naaraayanah | Naaraanaam ayanam naaraayanah * is *tatpurusha samaasa*.  [[156]] In *Shruti, swara * itself will tell how the meaning is to be taken. When He becomes *antaryaami*, then only the *vastu * gets the *vastutva. Naaraayana * is different from *Chaturmukha Brahma*, and there is no *svaroopa aikya. Naama **roopa vyaakarana * was done after His *anupravesha*. He is present as *antaryaami * in any object which has name or form. Ultimately, everything connotes *Bhagavaan * only in *aparyavasaana vrutti*. They are all His *shareera*, inseparably associated with Him. That which is *aadheya, niyaamya, **shesha * is *shareera*. Water is *Vishnu's shareera. Poorvam * means before *srushti*. Before *srushti, Naaraayana * is the cause, *kaarana*. This clearly distinguishes the effect and cause. In the causal state, *Bhagavaan * is said to be *Naaraayana*, and in the state of effect, *Chaturmukha Brahma * is created, and He is residing as *antaryaami*. So, He is different and distinct from *Chaturmukha Brahma*. 



*Aaseet idam tamobhootam aprajnyaatam alakshanam |* It was called *Tamas*, and it was without any name and form differentiation. And then, *Bhagavaan * creates from that. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 7: *** ***Toyaa antasthaam maheem jnyaatvaa jagati ekaarnaveekrute |*** ***Anumaanaat tat uddhaaram kartukaamah prajaapatih ||*** The whole world has become one huge ocean. He inferred that I have to do *uddhaara* of this world. 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 8: *** ***Akarot sva tanoom anyaam kalpaadishu yathaa paraa |*** ***Matsya koormaadikaam tadvat vaaraaham vapuraasthitaah ||***  [[157]] He took the form of the boar, in the same way that He had done *Matsya **avataara, Koorma avataara*, in other *kalpaas*. He took on the form of *Varaaha*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Toyaantaam iti | Toyaantaam samaheem iti paathaantaram |   
Toyenaanto naasho yasyaah taam | Anumaanaat \* So apashyat   
pushkara parnam iti pushkara parna linga darshanaat jnyaatvaa,   
naaraayana moorteh anyaam matsya koormaadikaam sva tanum yathaa   
puraa akarot tathaa vaaraaha roopam aasthitah toyam pravivesha iti   
anvayah |*** Worlds when they end, they all become water. In the state of dissolution, everything becomes water. He saw a lotus leaf floating on the water. Seeing this, He inferred that the world is immersed in this, and I have to uplift this world and bring it out. Having taken the form of the boar, He entered into the water. 



*Bhagavaan * took on the form of *Varaaha*, and entered into the water in order to save the world. 





## 9
This is a wonderful explanation of the *Varaaha Avataara*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 9: *** ***Veda yaynya mayam roopam ashesha jagatah sthitou |*** ***Sthitah sthiraatmaa sarvaatmaa paramaatmaa prajaapatih ||*** As though it is made of *Veda * and *yajnya*, as though the world is supported by *Veda * and *Vaidika dharma*, is the meaning. For the purpose of sustenance. 



 [[158]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Veda iti | Veda yajnya mayama roopam veda yajnya mayatvena   
niroopaneeyam, veda vaidika dharmaih bhooh dhaaryate iti bhaavah |   
Sthitou sthitah sthiti nimittam aasthitah, sthiraatmaa rakshane sthira   
chittah |*** He is very firm about protection. He is the inner self of everything, the Supreme Self. 





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 10: *** ***Jana loka gataih siddhaih sanakaadyaih abhistutah |*** ***Pravivesha tadaa toyam aatmaa aadhaaro dharaadharah ||*** *Sanaka * and others who have moved to *jana loka*, are eulogizing Him, singing hymns of praise of His wonderful powers and capabilities, in order for creation. He Himself is the support of Himself, there is no other support. He entered into the waters, one who is supporting the world. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Jana loka iti | Abhistutah strushtyartham udbodhita mahimaa;   
stooyamaana hi devataa veeryena vardhate iti nyaayaat |*** It is well known that when a *devataa * is praised, the *veerya * increases. 





## 11
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 11: *** ***Nireekshyatam tadaa devee paataala talam aagatam |*** ***Tushtaava pranataa bhootvaa bhakti namraa vasundharaa ||*** *Bhoodevi*, bowing in great devotion, was greatly pleased, and felt very happy, on seeing *Bhagavaan * entering in the form of a great boar, into the *paataala*.  [[159]] 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 12: *** ***Sri Pruthivi uvaacha:*** ***Namaste pundareekaaksha shankha chakra gadaadhara |*** ***Maam uddhara asmaat adya tvam tvaatto aham poorvamutthitaa ||*** O *Pundareekaaksha*, one who is holding *shanka, chakra, gadaa*, please do save me from here. I was created by You only. I was born from You only. From this ocean that has formed, please do save me. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Nama iti | Maam uddhara asmaat pralaabdheh | Tvatta utthitaa   
utpannaa |*** 





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 13: *** ***Tvayaa aham uddhrutaa poorvam tvanmayaa aham janaardana |*** ***Tathaa anyaani cha bhootaani gagana aadeeni asheshatah ||*** Earlier also, I was saved by You. You are the material cause for me. In the same way, all the other elements, sky, You are the only cause. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tvayaa iti | Tvat mayaa tvat mayee tvat upaadaanaa |*** 





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 14: *** ***Namaste paramaatmaatman purushaatman namo astu te |***  [[160]] ***Pradhaana vyakta bhootaaya kaala bhootaaya te namah ||*** O Supreme Lord of everything, You are only present as *pradhaana*, the unmanifest, the manifest, and also *kaala*. I offer my obeisance to You. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Nama iti | Paramaatmaatman purusha aadi chatooroopa vilakshana   
svaroopa | Apyaye aniruddhaadayah purusha achyuta satya   
vaasudevaakhyaah |*** One who is having four distinct forms, called *Purusha * and others. During *pralaya*, the four forms told in *aagamaas, Vaasudeva, Sankarshana, **Pradyumna, Aniruddha. Aniruddha * is called *Purusha. Pradyumna * is called *Achuyta. Sankarshana * is called *Satya*. 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 15: *** ***Tvam kartaa sarva bhootaanaam tvam paataa tvam vinaashakrut |*** ***Sarga aadishu prabho brahma vishnu rudra aatma roopa dhruk ||*** You are the creator of everything, You are the protector, You are the destroyer. All these You do during creation and others, taking on the form of *Brahma, Vishnu * and *Rudra*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tvam iti | Brahma ityaadi - brahma vishnu rudra roopa dhara |*** Taking on the form of *Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra*, You only do creation, sustenance and destruction of this world. 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 16: ***  [[161]] ***Sambhakshayitvaa sakalam jagati ekaarnaveekrute |*** ***Sheshe tvam eva govinda chintyamaano maneeshibhih ||*** Having eaten up everything, the world becomes one huge ocean, You are only sleeping, O *Govinda*, being meditated upon by the knowledgeable wise ones. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sambhakshayitvaa iti | Sheshe - svapishi |*** 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 17: *** ***Bhavato yat param \(roopam\) tattvam tat na jaanaati kaschana |*** ***Avataareshu yat roopam tat archanti divoukasah ||*** What is the supreme reality of Your *svaroopa, svabhaava*, nobody can know that fully. The gods worship You in the form of Your *avataaraas*. 



This is one of the *prayojana * of *avataaraas*, as is also seen in *Geetha **Bhaashya*. If *Bhagavaan * does not do *avataara*, nobody will know in which form to worship *Bhagavaan*. The supreme form which He exists as *Paravaasudeva*, nobody has seen or can imagine. How to do *dhyaana * without a form? The mind needs an *aalambana*, a support for meditation. This is why *Bhagavaan * does *avataara*, in order to show a form, in which all can meditate upon Him and worship Him. 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 18: *** ***Tvam aaraadhya param brahma yaataa muktim mumukshavah |*** ***Vaasudevam anaaraadhya ko moksham samavaapsyati ||***  [[162]] Those who are desirous of getting liberated, they were liberated by worshipping You only. Who can get liberated without worshipping *Vaasudeva*. *Vasati atra iti vai yatah, sarvam yatra vasati, **sarvatra asou vasati. * 



Like this, *pruthivi * is eulogizing *Bhagavaan * in the *Varaaha avataara*, in these most wonderful *shlokaas*. Further, *pruthivi * praises the *yajnya svaroopa*, and the *Varaaha roopa * is explained by *Paraasharar*. 



*Pruthivi Devi * is eulogizing *Mahaa Varaaha*. The *Varaaha Stuti * by *pruthivi * has started. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 17: *** ***Bhavato yat param \(roopam\) tattvam tat na jaanaati kaschana |*** ***Avataareshu yat roopam tat archanti divoukasah ||*** 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 18: *** ***Tvam aaraadhya param brahma yaataa muktim mumukshavah |*** ***Vaasudevam anaaraadhya ko moksham samavaapsyati ||*** 



Worshipping You only, O Supreme Brahman, all those desirous of *moksha * attain *mukti*. Without worshipping *Vaasudeva*, how can anyone get *moksha*? 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 19: *** ***Yat kinchit manasaa graahyam yat graahyam chakshuraadibhih |***  [[163]] ***Buddhyaa cha yat paricchedyam tat roopam akhilam tava ||*** *Pruthivi * is praising *Bhagavaan's * most wonderful *Varaaha roopa*. Whatever is grasped through the mind like *sukha, dukha*, etc., whatever is perceived through our external senses like eyes, and whatever is known by our intellect, inference, that is whatever is known through other *pramaanaas * like *anumaana*, all that form is Yours only. You are only existing as everything. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yat kinchit iti | Manasaa graahyam sukhaadi, chakshuraadi graahyam   
roopaadi, buddhyaa paricchedyam vyaapti sambandha jnyaana aadinaa   
pramaanaantara paricchedyam | *** 





## 20
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 20: *** ***Tvat mayaa aham tvat aadhaadhaaraa tvat srushtaa tvat   
samaashrayaa |*** ***Maadhaveem iti loko ayam abhidhatte tato hi maam ||*** The *upaadaana kaarana * of *pruthivi * is *Bhagavaan * only. You are my support, I am created by You only, I have taken refuge in You only. Since I belong to *Maadhava*, in the world, I am known as *Maadhavee*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tvat mayaa iti | Maadhavee | Maadhavasya iyam iti maadhavee |*** 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 21: *** ***Jayaa akhila jnyaana maya jaya sthoola mayaa avyaya |*** ***Jayaa ananta jaya avyakta jaya vyakta maya prabho ||***  [[164]] Hail to You, O Lord. One who knows everything by Himself. You are only the gross universe that is being seen, hail to You. You don't undergo any change, You are immutable. You are endless, You are unmanifest. You are *mahat * and others. 



Definition of *sarvajnya * as told by *Aalavandaar * is *yo vetti yugapat sarvam **pratyakshena sadaa svatah*, He knows everything at the same time, directly, all the time, by Himself. 



*Mahat * itself is said to be unmanifest; but compared to that, *Bhagavaan's * form is still more subtle. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Jaya iti | Akhila jnyaana maya - sarvajnya | Sthoolam jagat - tanmaya   
| Vyaktam mahat aadi, tanmaya |*** 



O Lord, You are the omniscient, the gross universe, everything is Your mode, being Your *shareera*. You are the immutable, You are the endless unmanifest, and the manifest. Everything is You only. 





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 22: *** ***Paraa paraatman vishvaatman jaya yajnya pate anagha |*** ***Tvam yajnyah tvam vashatkaarah tvam onkaarah tvam agnayah ||*** You are the inner self of everything that is superior and inferior, You are the Lord of the sacrifices, You are the one worshipped by the sacrifices, O blemishless, You are only the *yajnya*, You are *vashatkaara*. You are only the *pranava*, You are only the three *agnis * that are used in the *yajnya **\(gaarhapatya, daakshnaagni, aahavaneeya\). *  [[165]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Paraa paraatman iti | Paraa paraatman utkrushta nikrushtayoh aatma   
bhoota | Vashatkaarah astu shroushat ityaadi mantrah |*** 



In *Vedaas*, there are many *mantraas * that are used, like *Astu shroushat*. You are all those *mantraas*. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 23: *** ***Tvam vedaah tvam angaani tvam yajnya purusho hare |*** ***Sooryaadayo grahaa taaraah nakshatraani akhilam jagat ||*** You are only the *Vedaas*, You are *Veda pratipaadya*, You are the supporter of the *Vedaas*, You are the various *angaas * of the *Vedaas - shikshaa, **vyaakarana, nirukta, chandas*, etc., You are the one worshipped by the *yajnyaas*, You are the *adhidevataa * of the *yajnyaas*, You are the *Soorya * and the planets, stars. 



*Vedaas * are residing in *Bhagavaan * during *pralaya*, and He teaches them to *Chaturmukha * during *srushti*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tvam iti | Yajnya purushah yajnya aadi devataa | Taaraah   
kruttikaadyaah | Nakshatraani devagruhaah |*** 



*Nakshatraani * is explained as *deva gruhaah, Shruti * says *Devagruhaa vai **nakshatraani*, the residing places of the gods. 



 [[166]] Everything is supported by You, everything is Your *shareera*, everything is controlled by You, and is existing for Your purpose only. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 24: *** ***Moorta amoortam adrushyam cha drushyam cha purushottama |*** ***Yat cha uktam yat cha na eva uktam mayaa atra parameshvara |*** ***Tat sarvam tvam namah tubhyam bhooyo bhooyo namo namah ||*** The substances which exist everywhere are *moorta. Amoorta * are unmanifest or subtle. That which is unseen and that which is seen. Whatever I have mentioned here, and what I have not told, O Supreme Lord, You are everything. Everything is You only. I bow down in reverence to You again and again. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Moorta amoortam iti | Moortam sarvagatam dravyam | Drushyam   
pratyaksham |*** 



*Pruthivi * eulogizes Lord *Varaaha * in this wonderful way. *Paraasharar * continues explaining that wonderful form of *Varaaha*. 





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 25: *** ***Sri Paraasharah:*** ***Evam samstooyamaanah tu pruthivyaa dharaneedharah |*** ***Saamasvara dhvanih shreemaan jagarja parighargharam ||*** Bring eulogized by *Pruthivi*, the Lord who is bearing the earth, His voice was like *Saama Veda*, who is ever associated with *Shree, Bhagavaan * was very  [[167]] pleased by the hymns of praise by *Pruthivi*, and roared, indicating that He approved all of this. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Evam iti | Parighargharam iti varaaha jaati dhvani anukrutih |   
Garjanam strotra anumodana prakaarah |*** *Parigharghara * is the sound made by the boar. 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 26: *** ***Tatah samukshipya dharaam sva damshtrayaa mahaa varaahah sphuta   
padma lochanah |*** ***Rasaatalaat utpala patra sannibhah samutthita neela iva achalo   
mahaan ||*** *Paraasharar * says *Mahaa Varaaha*. He, with lotus like eyes, wide open, brought out the earth, from *Rasaatala*. He was looking like a huge dark hued mountain, like the dark hue of the lotus petal, as though a great mountain goes up from *Rasaatala*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Sphutam vikasitam | Neela utpala patravat snigdha   
shyaamah |*** 





## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 27: *** ***Uthisthataa tena mukhaanilaahatam tat sambhavaambho jana loka   
samshrayaan |*** ***Sanandanaadeen apakalmashaan muneen chakaara bhooyo api   
pavitrataa padam ||***  [[168]] As *Varaaha * was rising up, from His face, his mouth, the breath which was coming out, which is *Veda maya*; the water which was gushing out being pushed by the breath of *Mahaa Varaaha*, went up to *Jana Loka*, and *Sanandana * and the *munis*, who were taking refuge in *Jana Loka*, it purified them; all their blemishes got washed away; it made them pure. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Uttisthateti | Tat samplavaambha iti paathaantaram | Tat   
samplavaambhah tat abhisheka jalam | Bhagava mukha nishvaasya   
veda mayatvaaat tat prerita sheekara sparshaat iti paavanatvam \*   
tasya vaa etasya mahato bhootasya nihsvasitam etat yat rigvedah \*   
ityaadi shruteh | Ambhovisheshanam vaa pavitrataa padam iti |*** The water became pure being pushed by the breath of *Bhagavaan*, the breath is said to be *Veda maya*; the Supreme Brahman, His *nihsvaasa * is nothing but *Rig veda*. Being pushed by that, it had a cool touch, and it became most pure. Because of being pushed by the *Mahaa Varaaha's * breath, waters became purified and went up to *Jana Loka*, and purified all the *munis * there. 





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 28: *** ***Prayaanti toyaani khuraagravikshate rasaatale adhah kruta shabda   
santati |*** ***Shvaasaanilaastaah paritah prayaanti siddhaa jane ye niyataa vasanti   
||*** *Rasaatala * was torn apart by the sharp edge of the tusks of *Mahaa Varaaha*, water started moving down, gushing down making great noise. And being pushed by the breathing of *Mahaa Varaaha*, the waters started gushing all over, including the *Jana Loka * where *siddhaas * are living. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[169]] ***Prayaanti ityaadi | Varaahasya khuraagrena vikshate videerne   
rasaatale sati, adhah anda kataahe prayaanti sma | Kruta shabda   
santati iti kiyaa visheshanam | Tathaa cha shri vishnu dharmottare   
gangaa vyaaptou paataalaani adhikruti uktam \* roukma bhoumaat adho   
yaataa roudram tejah sudaarunam | Tatra api avilayam yaataa   
varaaham lokamaagataa | Vaaraaha loke brahmaandam adha oordhve   
bhinnavaan harih | Chidrena tena saa devee svaam yonim   
punaraagataa |*** *Rasaatala * being torn apart, the waters started moving down in the *anda **kataaha*. Great noise was made by the moving waters, when the *Rasaatala * got torn apart. *Sri Engal Aalwaan * quotes *Vishnu Dharma*, where *Ganga * came from *Deva Loka * to here, it went to various worlds. Various layers of the earth are told - *shveta bhouma, rakta bhouma, shilaa **bhouma, rukma bhouma*. Crossing all of this, it came to *Vaaraaha **loka*. *Brahmaanda * was torn apart into two halves by *Hari*. After that, He again came back to the original place. 





## 29
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 29: *** ***Uttishtatah tasya jalaardra kuksheh mahaa varaahasya maheem   
vigruhya |*** ***Vidhunvato veda mayama shareeram romaantarasthaa munayah   
stuvanti ||*** *Mahaa Varaaha*, as He rose up, all His body was wet with water, bringing out the earth, He shook off His body. His *shareeara * is said to be Veda *maya*, the hairs of the mane spread till *jana loka*. Those who were standing in between the hairs of the mane, started praising Him. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Uttishtatah iti | Romaantarasthaa munayah iti | Jana lokam yaavat   
taavat roma prasaaranaat iti bhaavah | Stuvanti sma iti sheshah |***  [[170]] 





## 30
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 30: *** ***Tam tushtuvuh tosha pareeta chetaso loke jane ye nivasanti yoginah |*** ***Sanandanaadyaa hi atinamra kandharaa dharaadharama   
dheerataroddha tekshanam ||*** All the yogis who are living in the *jana loka*, being very pleased in their minds, with minds filled with great joy, started praising Him. Yogis, none other than *Sanandana * and others, bowing down their heads in great reverence, *Mahaa Varaaha * who was supporting the earth; without doubt, He was casting His glances of *oudaarya * on everything, and everyone. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tam iti | Tosha parita chetasah toshena aanandena vyaaptaani   
chetaamsi yeshaam te | Ati namra kandharaah preeti bhaarena |   
Dheera taroddhatekshanam nirvishanka udaara eekshanam iti arthah |*** 





## 31
*Sanandana * and other *yogis * start praising the *Mahaa Varaaha*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 31: *** ***Jayeshvaraanaam paramesha keshava prabho gadaa shankha dharaasi   
chakradhruk |*** ***Prasooti naasha sthiti hetuh eeshvara tvam eva naanyat paramam cha   
yat padam ||*** You are the Lord of *Brahma, Rudra*. O Lord, One who is bearing the most wonderful divine weapons, *gadaa, shankha, khadga, chakra*. You are the cause of creation, sustenance, destruction. You are only the Lord. The *mukta svaroopa * is also You only. *Parama pada * is *padyate iti padam*, that which is attained, is also You only. *Parama pada * is also under Your control.  [[171]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Jayeti | Eeshvaraanaam brahmaadeenaam | Keshaveti | \* Ka iti   
brahmano naama eesho aham sarva dehinaam | Aavaam tavaange   
sambhootou tasmaat keshava naamavaan || Iti mahaabhaarate |   
Prasooti aadeenaam tvam eva hetuh | Eeshvarah niyantaa | Paramam   
cha yat padam mukta svaroopam, tat cha tvatto naanyat | Tat   
paramam padam tvam eva iti arthah, tasya tvat adheenatvaat |*** *Rudra * praises *Bhagavaan - Kah * is said to be the name of *Chaturmukha **Brahma*. I am *Eeshvara*. We both were born from You only. That is why You are called *Keshava*. 





## 32
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 32: *** ***Paadeshu vedaah tava yoopa damshtra danteshu yajnyaah chitayah cha   
vaktre |*** ***Hutaasha jihvo asi tanooruhaani darbhaah prabho yajnya pumaan tvam   
eva ||*** The entire *shareera * of *Paramaatman * is said to be *yajnya*. He is said to be *yajnya purusha*. All the *Vedaas * are in Your *paada*. Your tusk is the *yoopa **stambha*, where the *pashu * is tied. All the sacrifices are in Your teeth. Your mouth is the altar. Your tongue itself is *agni*. All the hairs in Your body are sacrificial *darbha*. O Lord, You are only the personification of a *yajnya*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Paadeshu iti | Yajnyaah agnistoma aadyaah, chitayah kanka chita   


## 33
aadyaani chayanaani uttara kratushu uttara veda sthaaneeyaani |*** Yajnyaah means agnishtoma and other yagnyas, chitayah means kankachita, shyenachita etc whch are told that are the chayanas and located in place of uttaravedi in uttarakratu’s.  [[172]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 33: *** ***Vilochane raatri ahanee mahaatman sarvaaspadam brahma param   
shiraste |*** ***Sooktaanya asheshaani sataa kalaapo ghraanam samastaani haveemshi   
deva ||*** Night and day are Your eyes. Day and night are told as the time of the *yajnya*. The refuge of all the *varnaas. Brahma, pranava * is Your *shiras*. All *Vedic * hymns are Your mane. Your nostrils are the oblations, *havis * offered in a *yajnya*. 



*Sarvaashrayam* is also a *paathaantara*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Vilochane iti | Raatri ahanee chandraarkopalakshitou yajnyeeya kaalou   
| Sarvaaspadam iti paathe sarva varnaashrayatvaat sarvaaspadam |   


## 34
Brahma pranavah | Sataah skandha romaani |*** Raatri and ahanee – means the kaalas for yagnyas indicated by Chandra and surya. The times for various yajnyas are decided in jyoutisha \(which is a vedaanga\). There are two paathas – sarvaaspadam and sarvaashrayam. Since ‘brahma’ which means pranava is you shiras as it is aashraya for all varnas. Sataakalaapa means the hairs of your mane. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 34: *** ***Sruk tunda saamasvara dheera naada praagvamsha kaaya akhila satra   
sandhe |*** ***Poorteshta dharma shravano asi deva sanaatanaatman bhagavan   
praseeda ||*** *Sruk, sruva, darvi*, the ladle with which the *havis * is offered, are Your tongue. Your deep voice is the sound of *saama gaana*. Your body is the  [[173]] *praagvamsha*, front portion of the *yajnya vaatikaa, agni shaalaa*. A *yaaga * which is ordained to attain something which is immediately available, is a *satram*. All Your joints are the *satra*. Your ears are the *poorta * and *ishta*; the tanks are called *poorta*, and *ishta * are the *yajnya * and others. You are *anaadi*, and of the same form all the time, be pleased. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sruk tunda iti | Praagvamsha agni shaalaayaah praagdeshah | Satram   
aasannopaaya chodanaa chodito yaagah | Poortam tataaka khaataadi |   
Ishtam yajnyaadi |*** 





## 35
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 35: *** ***Pada krama antaa bhuvam bhuvantam aadi sthitam cha akshara vishva   
moorte |*** ***Vishvasya vidmah parameshvaro asi praseeda naatho asi paraavarasya   
||*** What is told here is *shabda brahma*, made of *akshara, pada, krama*, and the way *Vedaas * are recited. The *shabda brahma*, which is all pervading - all are You only. You are the *vaachya * for all the *vaachaka shabdaas*. You are the supreme lord of this whole world. You are the Lord, the one to whom we can pray. *Para avarasya naathah*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Pada krameti | Pada kramaabhyaam aakraantam vyaaptam | Anantam   
aadou cha sthitam shabda brahma iti arthah | Aksharah kakaara aadi   


## 36
varnaatmakah | Naathah praarthyah svaamee vaa |***  [[174]] Everything is pervaded by pada and karma. It means that which exists in the beginning and end – which is shabda brahma. Aksharah means ‘ka’kaara and other varnas. Naathah means swamee or one who is prayed to. Beautiful similes are given how *Mahaa Varaaha* was looking. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 36: *** ***Damshtra agra vinyastam ashesham etat bhroomandalam naatha   
vibhaavyate te |*** ***Vigaahatah padma vanam vilagnam sarojini patram iva oodhapankam   
||*** This entire universe which is placed on the edge of Your tusk, is seen as though You are sporting in the lotus pond, as though a lotus petal having some mud on it. The whole universe on Your tusk is looking like some mud which is sticking to a lotus petal when You are sporting in the lotus pond and get up. 





## 37
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 37: *** ***Dyaavaapruthivyoh achala prabhaava yat antaram tat vapushaa   
tavaiva | *** ***Vyaaptam jagat vyaapti samartha deepte hitaaya vishvasya vibho   
bhava tvam ||*** O all pervading lord, of incomparable glory, all the place in between *dyu **loka * and *pruthivi loka * is all filled with Your great form, which is capable of pervading the entire world. Do good to the entire world. Grace us with all good. 



Now, the *Aadi Varaaha Chatusshloki * which is famous, and is commented upon in *Sri Bhaashya * in detail, comes, in the next four *shlokaas*. 





## 38
 [[175]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 38: *** ***Paramaarthah tvam eva eko naanyo asti jagatah pate |*** ***Tavaiva mahimaa yena vyaaptam etat charaacharam ||*** *Paramaartha * is that which is real, there is no other Lord. He is *chit achit **vishishta*, so everything is said to be Him only. You are the Lord of the universe. All this is Your glory only. All the movables and immovables are pervaded by Your *mahimaa * only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Paramaartha ityaadi | Paramaarthah satyah | Tvat vyatiriktah   
paramaartho naasti \* Bahu syaam \* Sa brahmaa sa shivah sa indrah sah   
aksharah paramah svaraat \* Neha naanaasti \* Tasmin jajnye svayam   
brahmaa \* Sarva gatvaat anantasya \* Tat anupravishya, sat cha tyat   
cha abhavat, \* Harih akhilaabhih udeeryate \* Hareh na kinchit   
vyatiriktam asti \* ityaadibhyah | Atra hetuh yena upaadaana bhootena   
tvayaa etat charaacharam vyaaptam tasya tava eva   
charaacharaatmano mahimaa, atah tvat aatmakam eva idam sarvam   
iti, tvat anyah ko api paramaartho naasti iti bhaavah |*** There is no other *paramaartha * other than You. *Bhagavaan * did *sankalpa *'Let Me become many', He Himself became many. Everything is His *vibhooti*, all are told in *saamaanaadhikaranya*. He is the *antaraatman * of everything. The multiplicity of *brahmaatmaka * and *abrahmaatmaka * does not exist. *Brahma * was also born in Him only. He is everywhere. Having entered, He became *sat * and *tyat, chetana * and *achetana*. You who are the material cause of everything, all the movables and immovables are pervaded. This is all Your greatness, glory. Everything is *bhagavadaatmaka*; You are the inner self of everything. There is nothing other than You which can be said to be *paramaartha*. This all pervasiveness of Yours, with which You are pervading all the movables and immovables, is Your glory. 



 [[176]] This is also explained in *Sri Bhaashya. Paramaarthah tvam eva ekah **ityaadyapi na krutsnasya apaaramaarthyam vadati. Api tu krustsnasya **tadaamakatayaa tat vyatirekena avasthitasya apaaramaarthyam. * Because everything is *bhagavat aatmaka*, there is nothing which is existing apart from Him as not being *bhagavat aatmaka*. Because You are pervading all these movables and immovables, everything is *bhagavat aatmaka*, having You as inner self, there is nothing other than You. Because of being the inner self of everything, You are only the *paramaartha*. This all pervasiveness which is there, is Your glory, greatness. Otherwise, if everything was illusion, it would have been told *bhraanti*. It is not said *bhraanti*, but *mahimaa. Bhaashyakaarar * mentions the *Mahaa Varaaha **avataara * of *Vishnu Puraana * here. O Lord of the universe, all these become secondary if everything was illusion. This whole *prakarana * is eulogizing the *Mahaa Varaaha*, who uplifted the universe, very easily, without any difficulty. 





## 39
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 39: *** ***Yat etat drushyate moortam etat jnyaanaatmanah tava |*** ***Bhraanti jnyaanena pashyanti jagat roopam ayoginah ||*** All that which are manifest, the gross form, this universe which is being seen, all is Your form only, because You are the one who is pervading all these as the inner self. All these are Your form only. Those who do not have that *yoga*, who have not performed that meditation, which is the means to experience the fact that everything is *Bhagavat aatmaka*, are *ayogis*. Those who do not have the means to experience that You are the inner self of everything, they see everything as that form which is seen only; this is a wrong perception. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yat etat iti | Yat etat jagat drushyate jnyaanaatmanaa tvayaa   
aatmatayaa vyaaptatvaat etat tava moortam moortih, tasmaat *** [[177]] ***ayoginah tvat aatmakatva anubhava saadhana yoga virahinah, etat   
kevala deva manushyaadi roopam iti bhraanti jnyaanena pashyanti |*** The *ayogis * perceive this whole world as simply made of gods and humans, and such forms only, which is a wrong perception. They do not perceive the inner self, existing in everything. Because of the inner self existing in everything, every form seen in this world is a manifestation of *Bhagavaan * only. All are His mode, His *shareera*. 



This is also explained in *Sri Bhaashya * in a similar way. The *ayogis * see as 'This is only the human that I am seeing', 'This is only the *deva*', 'This is only the animal that I am seeing' - like this, they perceive only the form that they are seeing. They do not perceive the *aatman* who is inside. Because of *Paramaatman* being inside only can anything function, or exist. That is why they are seeing with a wrong perception; they see as an illusion. 





Recap:The first two *shlokaas * of the *Aadi Varaaha Chatusshloki*. 





## 38
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 38: *** ***Paramaarthah tvam eva eko naanyo asti jagatah pate |*** ***Tavaiva mahimaa yena vyaaptam etat charaacharam ||*** 



Everything is You, and is inseparably associated with You. You are the only truth, the real truth. The *sat-shabda-vaachya Brahman * willed and said 'May I become many'. He is only *Chaturmukha Brahma, Shiva, Indra*, everything; all are His *vibhootis*. Everything is *Brahmaatmaka*, there is nothing which is *abrahmaatkama. Brahmaatmaka abrahmaatmaka naanaatva * does not exist. *Prahlaada* experiences that *Paramaatman * is everywhere, all pervading, *ananta*; I am only everything; everything is existing in Me. Having  [[178]] entered, He became the sentient and non-sentient. There is nothing is other than *Hari*. 



It is said ' *Tava esha mahimaa*'. If it was unreal, it would have been told ' *Tava **esha bhraantih*'. This is also the same experienced by *Nammaazhvaar*. He said that I am only the worlds, the oceans, the earth, everything is created by me only. *Nammaazhvaar * experiences the ' *Aham Brahmaasmi'. * Because everything *brahmaatmaka*. Every *roopa, naama * ultimately denotes *Paramaatman*. 



By His *mahimaa*, His wonderful powers, everything is pervaded. By You who is the material cause of this entire universe, the movables and immovables are all pervaded. This is Your wonderful *shakti * that You are being seen as all the movables and immovables here. Everything is having You as the inner self. There is nothing which exists, which does not have You as the inner self. 





## 39
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 39: *** ***Yat etat drushyate moortam etat jnyaanaatmanah tava |*** ***Bhraanti jnyaanena pashyanti jagat roopam ayoginah ||*** 



The whole universe which is being seen here, which is also real, is pervaded by You as the inner self. This is all Your *shareera*. Those who do not have the means to realize, that everything is having You as the inner self, the see all the things that are perceived here as mere forms of that person, being; they do not see the *Parabrahman * who is *antaryaami*. He is only the inner controller existing in everything. Everything is His *shareera*, being inseparably associated with Him, controlled by Him and supported by Him. Those who do not see this perceive with *bhraanti jnyaana*, as an illusion, which is wrong perception.  [[179]] 





## 40
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 40: *** ***Jnyaana svaroopam akhilam jagat etat abuddhayah |*** ***Artha svaroopam pashyanto bhraamyante moha samplave ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Vastutastu tvadaatmakasha jagatah kevala deva manushyaadi   
roopatvena darshanam eva na bhramah, jnyaanaakaaraanaam   
aatmanaam deva manushyaadi arthaakaaratva darshanam api bhrama   
ityaaha jnyaana svaroopam iti | Jnyaana svaroopam   
jnyaanaatmakatvam iti arthah | Atra jnyaana shabdena jnyaana guna   
saaratvaat pratyagaatma uchyate | Na ayam shlokah para vishayah,   
yushma shabda adarshanaat | Prakruti purusha viveka eva naasti kutah   
tvat darshanam iti bhaavah |*** 



The *brahma * told is not mere seeing of all the forms as bird, or cow, or mountain, as that form only; not realizing the *Paramaatman * who is *antaryaami*; this is one *bhrame*. The second aspect is that there is also a *jeevaatman * inside each. A *manushya * who is seen is *manushya deha **vishishta jeevaatma vishishta Paramaatman. Chit achit vishishta **Paramaatman * is there is every being. External appearance is the *achetana*, the body, *shareera*. Inside is the *jeevaatman*. Controlling both of these is *Paramaatman*, for whom both of these are *shareera*. The entire world which has You as the inner self, seeing it as only that form, this is not the only *bhrame * which exists. The individual selves which are also of the nature of consciousness, is *deha aatma bhrame*; when we call a person *Devadatta*, we think that only the external appearance, body is *Devadatta*, without realizing the *jeevaatman * who is inside. Here, *jnyaana svaroopam * is referring to the *jeevaatman*. Those who are not knowledgeable, they see only the external appearance; they are deluded. By *jnyaana shabda * is meant *pratyagaatma*, one who has a *jnyaatrutva*. It is not mere knowledge,  [[180]] but *jnyaana * with *jnyaatrutva guna*. A knower is only told as *jnyaana*, mere consciousness, because the aspect of knowership is the most prominent characteristic of a *jeevaatman. Tat guna saaratvaat tu tat vyapadeshah **praajnyavat*, is a *Brahma Sutra. Vijnyaanam yajnyam tanute * is from *Taittiriya Upanishad*. Here, it is not *viyjaana*, but *vijnyaataa*. Here, the most essential characteristic of *jeevaatman*, which is knowership is told. His *svaroopa * is also *jnyaana*, and *guna * is also *jnyaana*. 



This *shloka * is not about *Paramaatman*, as there is no *yushmat shabda*. Here, yogis are praising *Varaaha roopi Paramaatman; Sanaka, Sanandana* and others are euologizing Him; earlier it was told about *Paramaatman*. Now, it is not a repetition telling about *Paramaatman*, it is about *jeevaatman*. They do not have the discriminatory knowledge of the body and *jeevaatman * is itself not there, how can they realize You who are the inner self of even *jeevaatman*? 





## 41
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 41: *** ***Ye tu jnyaana vidah shuddha chetasah te akhilam jagat |*** ***Jnyaanaatmakam prapashyanti tvat roopam parameshvara ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Ye punah buddhimanto jnyaana svaroopa aatma vidah sarvasya hi   
bhagavat aatmakatva anubhava saadhanayoga yogya parishuddha   
manasah cha te deva manushyaadi prakruti parinaama vishesha roopam   
akhilam jagat shareera atirikta jnyaana svaroopa aatmakam tvat   
shareeram cha pashyanti iti aaha ye tu iti |*** The knowledgeable ones, those knowledgeable about the nature of consciousness, *jnyaana svaroopa * of *Paramaatman * and *jeevaatman*, they have pure mind, which is capable of meditating, the means to experience everything as *bhagavadaatmaka*, having the mind capable of meditating like  [[181]] that; all the forms which we see, the external appearances of *deva, **manushya*, etc., they are the modifications of *prakruti *- they perceive it as there is something beyond the world that is seen here, which is *Paramaatman*, and the *jeevaatman*, this is how they realize. 





## 42
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 42: *** ***Praseeda sarva sarvaatman bhavaaya jagataam imaam |*** ***Uddharorveem mameyaatman sham no dehi abjalochana ||*** O *Paraamaatman*. You are the inner self of everything that exists. Let this world exist, and let it survive. Be pleased, O lotus eyed supreme Lord. Please grant us all auspiciousness, grant us peace, O Lotus eyed Lord. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Praseedeti | Bhaavaaya jagataam iti paathe bhaavaaya sadbhaavaaya   
|*** There is another *paatha * called *bhaavaaya jagataam*. This means for proper existence. 





## 43
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 43: *** ***Sattvodrikto asi bhagavan govinda pruthiveem imaam |*** ***Samuddhara bhavaayesham sham no dehi abjalochana ||*** You are having excess of *sattva guna, O Bhagavan, Govinda*, please uplift this *pruthivi*, let it exist and let it live. 





## 44
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 44: *** ***Sarga pravruttih bhavato jagataam upakaarini |***  [[182]] ***Bhavatyeshaa namaste astu sham no dehi abjalochana ||*** You who are going to engage in this creation, which is for the good of the world only. We do obeisance, we pray You, do grant us all auspiciousness. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sattva udrikto asi iti | Sattva udrikto asi, atah para upakaarako asi |*** 





## 45
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 45: *** ***Sri Paraasharah: *** ***Evam samstooyamaanastu paramaatmaa maheedharah |*** ***Ujjahaara kshitim kshipram nyastavaan cha mahaambhasi ||*** Being eulogized thus, *Paramaatman*, who is carrying the *pruthivi*, called *Maheedharah*, lifted it up quickly, and placed it on the huge ocean. 





## 46
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 46: *** ***Tasya upari jaloughasya mahatee nouriva sthitaa |*** ***Vitatatvaat tu dehasya na mahee yaati samplavam ||*** This *pruthivi * was looking as though a huge ship, placed on that ocean. Because the expanse of the earth was so much, it did not submerge in it. 





## 47
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 47: *** ***Tatah kshitim samaam krutvaa pruthivyaam so achinot gireen |*** ***Yathaa vibhaagam bhagavaan anaadih parameshvarah ||***  [[183]] He made it uniform, and started forming mountains in the same way that it used to exist earlier, He started making divisions, the Supreme Lord who is beginningless. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tasya iti | Vitatvaat - vistruta mrutpinda aakaara samsthaanatvaat |   
Mrutpinda aakaaraa hi apsu majjati na tu shaaraavaadi aakaaraa |*** *Pruthivi * was like a ball of mud, it was expanded, broad. 





## 48
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 48: *** ***Praak sarga dagdhaan akhilaan parvataan pruthiveetale |*** ***Amoghena prabhaavena sasarja amogha vaanchitah ||*** Before creation, all mountains which were all burnt earlier, He created with His wonderful powers, through His mere *sankalpa*; His *sankalpa * will never go wrong. He is called *satya kaamah, satya sankalpah *- whatever He desires will happen. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Praak iti | Prabhaavena sankalpena, amogha vaanchitah satya kaamah   
|*** 





## 49
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 49: *** ***Bhoo vibhaagam tatah krutvaa sapta dveepaan yathaatatham |*** ***Bhooraadyaam chaturo lokaan poorvavat samakalpayat ||*** Creating all the divisions of the earth, and all the seven islands, *bhooh, **bhuvah*, and the *lokaas*, He created. He created them as earlier.  [[184]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Bhoo vibhaagam iti | Bhooh iti paataalaam api upalakshanam |*** *Bhoo * is *upalakshana * for everything - the *bhoo, bhuvah*, etc., and the *paataalaas*. He also created all the words which are below. 





## 50
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 50: *** ***Brahma roopa dharo devah tato asou rajasaa aavrutah |*** ***Chakaara srushtim bhagavaan chaturvaktradharo harih ||*** Then He took the form of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, and was filled with *rajas*, which made Him to act. Taking on four faces, the form *Hari*, He started creation. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Brahma roopa iti | Chaturvaktra dhara iti | Hareh brahma roopa   
dhaaratayaa chaturvaktratvam suvacham |*** 





## 51
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 51: *** ***Nimitta maatrameva asou srujyaanaam sarga karmani |*** ***Pradhaana kaaraneebhootaa yato vai srujya shaktayah ||*** In the act of creation of those who are going to be created, the *Bhagavaan * is just a *nimitta*, He just does the act of creation. According to the *praacheena karma vaasanaas * of all the individual selves, the creation happens. Whether someone becomes a *deva, manushya, vruksha*, or *pashu*, though *Paramaatman * does creation through *Chaturmukha Brahma*, it is only because of the *praacheena karma vaasanaa * of the individual self; whatever  [[185]] is accumulated over innumerable births, they take on the next birth. This is decided based on the karma, and *Bhagavaan * is only a *nimitta * in the act. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Nimitta maatram iti | Srujya shaktayah - jeevaanaam praacheena   
karma vaasanaah |*** 





## 52
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 4, Shloka 52: *** ***Nimitta maatram muktvaa enam na anyat kinchit apekshate |*** ***Neeyate tapataam sreshta sva shaktyaa vastu vastutaam ||*** There is no expectation from *Paramaatman * apart from being *nimitta*. Every object becomes that being because of its own *karma vaasanaa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Nimitta maatram iti | Nimitta maatram enam parama purusham   
muktvaa na anyat kinchit vishesha kaaranam apekshate | Vastu deva   
aadi sva shaktyaa sva karmabhih, vastutaam tat tat roopataam | Jeeva   
karmayat tattvaat vichitra srushteh teshu pradhaana kaaranatva uktih   
upachaarikee |*** Apart from *Paramaatman * being the *nimitta kaarana*, there is no other specific cause needed for creation. *Vastu * means *deva, manushya, pashu, **pakshi*, all the various things that are created, they all take that form based on the previous karma of that individual. *Vichitra srushti * happens by karma only. The various creations, differentiation into humans, *devas*, etc. is told as due to the *karma shaktis * only. The individual selves, though they take those forms, and are created like that, the main cause is said to be the karma behind them. 



 [[186]] ***|| Iti sri vishnu puraane prathame amshe pruthivi uddhaarah chaturtho   
adhyaahah ||*** The fourth chapter comes to an end. 



***|| Iti suri bhagavad raamaanuja charana nalina chanchareeka sri vishnu   
chitta virachite sri vishnu puraana vyaakhyaane vishnu chitteeye   
prathame amshe chaturtho adhyaayah ||*** 



***|| Atha Panchamo Adhyaayah ||*** 



Now, Maitreyar wants to know in more detail about the creation. 


