+++
title = "07"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 1:  *** ***Tato abhidhyaayatah tasya jagjnyire maanasaah prajaah |*** ***Tat shareera samutpannaih kaaryaih tat karanaih saha |*** ***Kshetrajnyaah samavartanta gaatrebhyah tasya dheematah ||*** When *Chaturmukha Brahma * started to meditate, do *sankalpa*, there were certain people born from his mind. They were also born out of his body, with *deha, indriya*, etc. The various elements born from the body of *Hiranya **Garbha*, from this, the *deha, indriya*, were created.  [[255]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Atha mithuna srushtim vaktum maanasa shareera srushteen anuvadati   
tata ityaadinaa | Tata iti | Kaaryaih dehaih, karanaih indriyaih,   
hiranya garbha deha bhoota utpannaih dehaih indriyaih saha   
maanasaah kaaschit maanasyah prajaah jajnyire | Kechit   
kshetrajnyaah tasya gaatrebhyah avayavebhyah kaarya karanaih saha   
samavartanta |*** The various elements born from the body of *Hiranya Garbha*, from this, the *deha, indriya*, were created. With this, some people, *maanasaah **prajaah*, were born out of his mind itself. Those who are having *shareera*, embodied souls, were born from his various limbs. They had body and *indriya*. They were born thus. 





## 2
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 2:  *** ***Te sarve samavartanta ye mayaa praak udaahrutaah |*** ***Devaadyaah sthaavaraantaah cha traigunya vishaye sthitaah ||*** All those who were created, who were told earlier itself, starting with *deva **srushti*, up to the *sthaavara srushti*, who were under the control of *triguna, **sattva, rajas, tamas*, who were all associated with *prakruti*, they were all existing. 





## 3
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 3:  *** ***Evam bhootaani srushtaani charaani sthaavaraani cha |*** These kind of beings were created, which were movable and immovable both. 





## 4
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 4:  ***  [[256]] ***Yadaa aasya taah prajaah sarvaah na vyavardhanta dheematah |*** ***Tadaa anyaan maanasaan putraan sadrushaan aatmano asrujat ||*** When they did not grow further, then *Chaturmukha Brahma * created other people born of his mind, who were similar to himself. They are called *maanasa putraas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Te sarva iti | Te devaadyaah sthaavaraantaah jeevaah traigunya   
vasheekrutaah samavartanta |*** 





## 5
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 5:  *** ***Bhrugum pulastyam pulaham kratum angirasam tathaa |*** ***Mareechim daksham atrim cha vasishtam cha eva maanasaan ||*** 





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 6:  *** ***Nava braahmana ityete puraane nischayam gataah |*** These are known as the nine *brahmins*, they are *Bhrugu, Pulastya, Pulaha, **Kratu, Angiras, Mareechi, Daksha, Atri, Vasistha*. They are known as *brahmans * in *Brahmaanda Puraana*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Nava braahmana iti | Puraane brahmaanda aadou | Poorvam srushteh |*** 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 7:  *** ***Khyaatim bhootim cha sambhootim kshamaam preetim tathaiva cha |***  [[257]] ***Sannatim cha tathaa eva orjaam anasooyaam tathaiva cha ||*** 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 8:  *** ***Prasootim cha tatah srushtvaa dadou teshaam mahaatmanaam |*** ***Patnyo bhavadhvam iti uktvaa teshaam eva tu dattavaan |*** Then *Chaturmukha Brahma * created nine women, *Khyaati, Bhooti, **Sambhooti, Kshamaa, Preeti, Sannati, Orjaa, Anasooyaa, Prasooti*. He gave them to these nine *maanasa putraas*, and told these nine women that you become wives to these *maanasa prajaas*. 





## 9
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 9:  *** ***Sanandanaadayo ye cha poorva srushtaah tu vedhasaa |*** ***Na te lokeshu asrujyanta nirapekshaah prajaah prati ||*** The first four *maanasa prajaas * who were created were *Sanandana * and others. These were earlier created by Brahma. They were all the time in meditation and never interested in worldly activities. They were never interested in procreation. 





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 10:  *** ***Sarve te abhyaagata jnyaanaa veetaraagaah vimatsaraah |*** ***Teshu evam nirapeksheshu loka srushtou mahaatmanah ||*** They had the ultimate knowledge, they had controlled desires, they had no *maatsarya*; when they were such, with no desires, ... 





## 11
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 11:  *** ***Brahmano abhoot mahaan krodhah trailokya dahanakshamah |***  [[258]] ***Tasya krodhaat samudbhootat jvaalaamaalaabhideepitam |*** ***Brahmano aboot tadaa sarvam trailokyam akhilam mune ||*** Then *Chaturmukha Brahma * got very angry, as he had created them with the idea that creation will continue through them, but they had controlled all desires, and had no desire to create or other worldly activities. Looking at them, *Chaturmukha Brahma * became extremely angry. His anger was such that it could burn the three worlds. All the three worlds were lighted like a garland of fire which came out of his anger. 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 12:  *** ***Bhrukuti kutilaat tasya lalaataat krodha deepitaat |*** ***Samutpannah tadaa rudro madhyaana aarka sama prabhah ||*** From his eyebrows which were twisted with anger, and from his forehead which was glowing with anger, *Rudra * was born, and was shining like the mid day sun. 





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 13:  *** ***Ardha naaree nara vapuh prachando ati shareeravaan |*** ***Bibhaja aatmaanam ityuktvaa tam brahmaantardadhe tatah ||*** He had half *nara * and half *naari*, half man and half woman; he had that kind of body. Then, *Brahma * disappeared telling *Rudra * that you split yourself into two. 





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 14:  *** ***Tatha ukto asou dvidhaa streetvam purushatvam tathaa akarot |*** ***Bibheda purushatvam cha dashadhaa cha ekadhaa punah ||***  [[259]] *Rudra * promptly listened to *Chaturmukha Brahma*, and divided himself into two parts - *purusha * and *stree*. The part which was *purusha*, he again divided into eleven parts. 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 15:  *** ***Soumya asoumyaih tathaa shaantaa ashaantaih steetvam cha sa   
prabhuh |*** ***Bibheda bahudhaa devah svaroopaih asitaih sthitaih ||*** The woman part of his body, he created into many many forms. Some were pleasant, some were not pleasant, some peaceful, some not peaceful, black and white. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tathoktaa iti | Streetvam purushatvam cha dvidhaa akarot - pruthak   
chakaara | Pumstvam cha ekaadashaavidham roopamedaih |*** 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 16:  *** ***Tato brahma aatma sambhootam poorvam svaayambhuvam prabhuh |*** ***Aatmaanam eva krutavaan prajaapaalye manum dvija ||*** *Chaturmukha Brahma*, for the purpose of continuation of the race, he created himself into *Svaayambhuva Manu*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Aatma sambhootam | Ata eva svayambhuvam aatmaanam eva   
tam prajaapaalye nimitte poorvam manum krutavaan |***  [[260]] From himself, for the purpose of continuing the creation, he created *Svaayambhuva Manu*. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 17:  *** ***Shataroopaam cha taam naareem tapo nirdhoota kalmashaam |*** ***Svaayambhuvo manuh devah patneetve jagruhe prabhuh ||*** From his *patni's amsha*, he created *Shataroopa. Swaayambhuva Manu*, who was created from the *purusha * part, married *Shataroopa*. 



Though *Swaayambhuva Manu * and *Shataroopa * had the same parents, they got married. There are two reasons told here for this. \(i\) They were having that kind of strength of *tapas*. \(ii\) They were *devaas. Swaayambhuva **Manu * accepted *Shataroopa * as his wife. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Shataroopaam iti | Shataroopaam arddhena purusho abhavat arddhena   
naari iti uktaayaa brahma patnyaah shataroopaayaa amsha bhootaam   
brahma amsha bhooto manuh jagruhe |*** From the *stree * part of his *amsha, Shataroopa * was created. 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 18:  *** ***Tasmaat tu purushaat devee shata roopaa vyajaayata |*** ***Priyavrato uttaanapaadou prasooti aakooti sanjnitam ||*** 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 19:  *** ***Kanyaadvayam cha dharmajnya roopa oudaarya gunaanvitam |***  [[261]] ***Dadou prasootim dakshaaya aakootim ruchaye puraa ||*** From *Swayambhuva Manu, Shataroopa * had two sons and two daughters. *Priyavrata * and *Uttaanapaada * were the two sons. *Prasooti * and *Aakooti * were the two daughters. They had good *roopa * and good qualities. *Prasooti * was given in marriage to *Daksha*, and *Aakooti * to *Rucha*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Kanyaa dvayam iti | Prajaapatih aakootim ruchaye dadou |*** 



The *vamsha*, and *vamsha anucharita * are part of the *Puraana*. This is *Puraana **lakshana*. 





## 20
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 20:  *** ***Prajaapatih sa jagraaha tayoh jajnye sadakshinah |*** ***Putro yajnyo mahaabhaaga dampatyoh mithunam tatah ||*** *Yajnya * and D *akshina * were born from *Ruchi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Prajaapatih iti | Sah - ruchih jagraaha, tayoh aakooti ruchayoh   
dampatyoh sadakshino yajnyah putro mithinam jajnire |*** Through the marriage of *Aakooti * and *Ruchi, Dakshina * and *Yajnya * were born as twins \( *mithuna*\). 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 21:  *** ***Yajnyasya dakshinaayaam tu putraa dvaadasha jajnire |***  [[262]] ***Yaamaa iti samaakhyaataa devaah svaayambhuve manou ||*** To *Yajnya* and *Dakshina*, twelve sons were born. They were called as *Yaamaas*; they are *devaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yajnyasya iti | Svaayambhuve manou - manvantare |*** 





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 22:  *** ***Prasootyaam cha tathaa dakshah chatasro vimshatim tathaa |*** ***Sasarja kanyaah taasaam cha samyak naamaani me shrunu ||*** Twenty four daughters were born of *Prasooti * and *Daksha*. Listen to their names. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 23:  *** ***Shraddhaa lakshmi dhrutih tushtih medhaa pushtih tathaa kriyaa |*** ***Buddhih lajjaa vapuh shaantih siddhih keertih trayodashee ||*** *Shraddhaa, Lakshmi, Dhruti, Tushti, Medhaa, Pushti, Kriyaa, Buddhi, **Lajjaa, Vapu, Shaanti, Siddhi, Keerthi*. These are thirteen names told. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 24:  *** ***Patnyartham prati jagraaha dharmo daakshaayini prabhuh |*** ***Taabhyah shishtaa yaveeyasya ekaadasha sulochanaah ||*** Dharma accepted these thirteen as his wives. 



 [[263]] The lineage is going to be told. This is the *vamsha anucharita*, this is one of the *lakshanaas * of *Puraana*. We shall take them up in the next session. These names have philosophical meanings. 



***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying *Amsha * 1, Chapter 7 of *Sri **Vishnu Puraanam*. Where we saw that *Swayambhuva **Manu * and *Shataroopa * have two sons \( *Uttaanapaada * and *Priyavrata*\) and two daughters \( *Aakooti * and *Prasooti*\). *Prasooti * marries *Daksha*, and *Aakooti * marries *Ruchi Prajaapati*. To *Aakooti * and *Ruchi Prajaapati*, twins are born - *Yajnya * and *Dakshina*, who get married; they get twelve sons, who are known as *Yaama Devataas. Daksha * and *Prasooti * get twenty four daughters. 





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 22:  *** ***Prasootyaam cha tathaa dakshah chatasro vimshatim tathaa |*** ***Sasarja kanyaah taasaam cha samyak naamaani me shrunu ||*** Twenty four daughters were born of *Prasooti * and *Daksha*. Listen to their names. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 23:  *** ***Shraddhaa lakshmi dhrutih tushtih medhaa pushtih tathaa kriyaa |*** ***Buddhih lajjaa vapuh shaantih siddhih keertih trayodashee ||*** *Shraddhaa, Lakshmi, Dhruti, Tushti, Medhaa, Pushti, Kriyaa, Buddhi, **Lajjaa, Vapu, Shaanti, Siddhi, Keerthi*. These are thirteen names told. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 24:  *** ***Patnyartham prati jagraaha dharmo daakshaayini prabhuh |***  [[264]] ***Taabhyah shishtaa yaveeyasya ekaadasha sulochanaah ||*** *Dharma * accepted these thirteen as his wives. 





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 25:  *** ***Khyaatih satyatha sambhootih smrutih preetih kshamaa tathaa |*** ***Santatih cha anasooyaa cha oorjaa svaahaa svadhaa tathaa ||*** The younger eleven daughters of *Daksha * and *Prasooti * are *Khyaati, Sati, **Sambhooti, Smruti, Preeti, Kshamaa, Santati, Anasooyaa, Oorjaa, **Svaaha*, *Svadhaa. * 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 26:  *** ***Bhruguh bhavo mareechischa tathaa chaiva angiraa munih |*** ***Pulastyah pulahah chaiva kratuh cha rishivarah tathaa ||*** 





## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 27:  *** ***Atrih vasistho vanhi cha pitarascha yathaa kramam |*** ***Khyaatyaadyaa jagruhuh kanyaa munayo munisattama ||*** These eleven were accepted as wives, in order, by *Bhrugu, Shiva, Mareechi, **Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Atri, Vasishta, Vanhi * and *Pitara*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yajnyasya iti | Svaayambhuve manou manvantare |*** 





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 28:  ***  [[265]] ***Shraddhaa kaamam chalaa darpam niyamam dhrutih aatmajam |*** ***Santosham cha tathaa tushtih lobham pusthih asooyata ||*** The children of *Dharma * are told. *Shraddhaa * gave birth to *Kaama, **Lakshmi * gave birth to *Darpa, Dhruti * gave birth to *Niyama, Tushti * gave birth to *Santosha, Pushti * gave birth to *Lobha*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Shraddheti | Sraddhaa kaamam tathaa darpam iti paathe tathaa iti   
anyena krama praaptaa lakshmeeh lakshyaa | Yathaa kourme \*   
Shraddhaa yaastu sutah kaamo darpo lakshmyaah sutah smrutah \* iti |*** There is a *paatha * called *tathaa darpam*, where *Lakshmi * is to be taken. In *Kurma Puraana * it is said that *Lakshmi's * son is *Darpa*. 





## 29
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 29:  *** ***Medhaa shrutam kriyaa dandam nayam vinayam eva cha |*** *Medha * gave birth to *Shruta, Kriyaa * gave birth to *Danda, Naya * and *Vinaya*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Medhaa iti | Kriyaa dandam kriyaayaam taamasyaam dandah,   
raajasyaam nayah, saatvikyaam maanaso anouddhati aatmaa vinayah |*** *Danda * is said to be when it is in *taamasa * mode; when in *Raajasa * mode, it is *Naya; Vinaya * is when it is obedient, or subservient, and when one does not feel superior in the mind, this is in the *Sattva * mode. Here, *Vinaya * is with respect to the mind. 





## 30
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 30:  ***  [[266]] ***Bodham buddhih tathaa lajjaa vinayam vapuraatmajam |*** ***Vyavasaayama prajajnye vai kshemam shaantih asooyata |*** *Buddhi * gave birth to *Bodha. Lajja * also gave birth to a son called *Vinaya *- this is said to be *shaareero vinayah*, when one is bodily subservient. *Vapu * gave birth to *Vyavasaaya. Shaanti * gave birth to *Kshema*. 





## 31
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 31:  *** ***Sukham siddhih yashah keertih iti ete dharma soonavah |*** ***Kaamaadratih sutam harsham dharma poutram asooyata ||*** *Siddhi * gave birth to *Sukha*, and *Keerthi * gave birth to *Yashas*. They are all the children of *Dharma*. From *Kaama, Rati * gave birth to *Harsha*, and *Dharma * was grandson. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Bodham iti | Lajjaayaah tu shareero vinayah |*** 





## 32
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 32:  *** ***Himsaa bhaaryaa tu adharmasya tato jajnye tathaa anrutam |*** ***Kanyaa cha nikrutih taabhyaam bhayam narakam eva cha ||*** *Himsaa * became wife of *Adharma*, and from them, a son was born by name *Anruta*, and a daughter by name *Nikruti*. From these two -*Anruta * and *Nikruti, Bhaya * and *Naraka * were born. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[267]] ***Dharma prasangaat adharma sargam aaha - himsaa iti | Tayoh   
adharma himsayoh anrutam nikrutih cha jajnye, taabhyaam nikruti   
anrutaabhyaam maayaa bhayam vedanaa narakam cha jajnye | *** Because the sons of *Dharma * were told, the sons of *Adharma * are also told. These are also the states of mind. In order to do creation, sustenance and dissolution - for creation and sustenance, *dharma* is required; for dissolution, *adharma * is also required. 





## 33
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 33:  *** ***Maayaa cha vedanaa chaiva mithunam tu idam etayoh |*** ***Tayoh jajnye atha vai maayaa mrutyum bhoota apahaarinam ||*** *Maayaa * and *Vedanaa * were born as twin daughters. From *Maaya, Bhaya * gave birth to *Mrutyu*, which causes an end to all the beings. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Maayaa iti | Tasmaat etayoh mithuna dvayam, bhayaajjajnya iti   
paathe etayoh mithunayoh madhye maaya bhayaat tu mrutyum jajnye |   
Tayoh jajnye iti paathe maaya mrutyum sushuve, bhayaat iti sheshah |*** 





## 34
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 34:  *** ***Vedanaa sva sutam cha api dukham jajnye atha rouravaat |*** ***Mrutyoh vyaadhi jaraa shoka trushnaa krodhaah cha jajnire ||*** *Naraka * married *Vedanaa*, and gave birth to *Dukha. Rourava * is to be taken as *Naraka*. From *Mrutyu, Vyaadhi, Jaraa, Shoka, Trushnaa, Krodha * were born. 



 [[268]] These are all the various sufferings and death. These are the means to cause dissolution. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Vedanaa iti | Rouravaat bhayam narakam eva chet uktaat narakaat |*** 





## 35
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 35:  *** ***Dukhottaraah smrutaa hi ete sarve cha adharma lakshanaah |*** ***Naishaam bhaaryaa asti putro vaa te sarve hi oordhvaretasah ||*** They are all of extreme sorrow and suffering. They are all signs of *adharma*. For them, there are no wife or children. They are said to be *oordhvaretas*. 



*Viraktaas, sannyaasis * are told as *oordhvaretas*. Because they do not have wife or children, they are said to be *oordhvaretas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Dukhottaraa iti | Adharma lakshanaah adharmo vamsha moola bhooto   
lakshanam eshaam te tathaa uktaah | Te vyaadhyaadyaah   
oordhvaretasah charama kaaryasya dukhaatmatvaat kaaryaantara   
anupaadakaah |*** These - *Vyaadhi, Jaraa, Shoka, Trushnaa, Krodha - adharma * is a sign of their entire *vamsha * itself. The end itself is of extreme sorrow, there is nothing else beyond this; so they are said to be *oordhvaretas*. 





## 36
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 36:  *** ***Roudraani etaani roopaani vishnoh munvaraatmaja |***  [[269]] ***Nitya pralaya hetutvam jagato asya prayaanti vai ||*** These are all the terrific forms of Vishnu, O *Maitreya*. They become the cause of *nitya pralaya * of this world. 



Now, the various kinds of *srushti * and *pralaya * are going to be told. 





## 37
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 37:  *** ***Daksho mareechih atrischa bhrugu aadyaascha prajeshvaraah |*** ***Jagati atra mahaa bhaaga nitya sargasya hetavah ||*** *Daksha, Mareechi, Atri, Bhrugu * and these hosts of *prajaapatis*, they are the causes of *nitya sarga*, the everyday creation which is happening. 





## 38
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 38:  *** ***Manavo manuputraah cha bhoopah veerya dhanaascha ye |*** ***Sanmaarga nirataah shooraah te nitya sthiti kaarinah ||*** The causes of the *nitya sthiti*, the daily sustenance that happens, are *Manu * and sons of *Manu*, who are the kings, with lot of valour, established in the righteous path, courageous and bold ones. 



Thus, *Paraasharar * explains the various forms of *dharma, adharma*, and how they are causing *nitya sarga, nitya sthiti*. 





## 39
Now, *Maitreyar * asks a question. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 39:  *** ***Maitreyah -***  [[270]] ***Yeyam nityaa sthitih brahman nitya sargah sthiteritah |*** ***Nitya abhaavah cha teshaam vai svaroopam mama kathyataam ||*** You talked about *nitya sarga, nitya sthiti, nitya pralaya *- daily creation, daily sustenance and daily dissolution. Please tell me their svaroopa, their nature, O knower of *Brahman*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Jeevaanaam srujyatvaadinaa paaratantryaat nitya sargaadou   
hetutvam anupapannam iti aashankyaa tat parihaara bubhutsayaa   
teshaam svaroopam prucchati yeyam iti |*** The people who are told - *Daksha, Mareechi, Manu*, their children - are all created, and will also get destroyed. They are dependent on others to create, and not independent. How are they told to be causes of *nitya sarga*, the daily creation? - this is the doubt that *Maitreyar* gets. In order to get that doubt cleared, he is asking about the nature of *nitya sarga, nitya sthiti, **nitya pralaya*. 





## 40
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 40:  *** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Sarga sthith vinaashaam cha bhagavaan madhusoodanah |*** ***Taistaih roopaih achintyaatmaa karoti avyaahato vibhuh ||*** *Paramaatman * only does all these things - creation, sustenance and destruction, taking on those forms, being the *antaryaami * of *Daksha, **Mareechi, Manu*, his children and *Vyaadhi * and others which were told. *Paramaatman's * forms cannot be thought of by anybody, it is unimaginable. How He is the inner controller of everything, and controls the entire process of creation, sustenance, dissolution, without expecting any other *sahakaari*, being *sahakaari nirapeksha*, one cannot even imagine this. He keeps doing this without any breakage.  [[271]] 





## 41
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 41:  *** ***Naimittikah praakrutikah tathaa eva aatyantiko dvija |*** ***Nityascha sarva bhootaanaam pralayo ayam chaturvidhah ||*** *Paraasharar * tells about four kinds of *pralaya - Naimittika, Praakrutika, **Aayantika, Nitya*. 





## 42
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 42:  *** ***Braahmo naimittikah tatra yacchete jagateepatih |*** ***Prayaati praakrutah chaiva brahmaandam prakrutou layam ||*** *Chaturmukha Brahma * has a day and night, one day is a *kalpa*. After a day, when he sleeps for one night, this is called *naimittika pralaya*. In the night when *Chaturmukha Brahma * sleeps, this is said to be *naimittika pralaya. **Chaturmukha Brahma * also goes into *praakruta pralaya*, when the *brahmaanda * also gets merged in its cause. *Brahmaanda * also gets merged into the *pancha bhootaas, pancha tanmaatraas*, everything becomes *avyakta*, which is merged into *Paramaatman, * in *ekee bhaava *- this is called *praakruta pralaya*, when *Chaturmukha Brahma, Brahmaanda*, everything merges into *moola prakruti*. Process of dissolution is in the reverse order of process of creation. 





## 43
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 43:  *** ***Jnyaanaat aatyantikah prokto yoginah paramaatmani |*** ***Nityah sadaiva bhootaanaam yo vinaasho divaanisham ||*** *Aatyantika pralaya * is from *Brahma jnyaana*, through *upaasane, prapatti*, those who get rid of *samsaara * forever. They are told as yogis, who go and join *Paramaatman* in *Parama Pada*. Every day and night, the beings are  [[272]] created and they die - this is happening all the 24 hours on a continuous basis - the beings dying daily is called *Nitya Pralaya*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Vishnuh eva sattva aadi shaktyaadhaana dvaaraa taih taih manvaadi   
roopaih sthiti aadi karoti iti pariharati - sargeti | Taih taih -   
manvaadiroopaih | Manvaadayah sattvasthaah, dakshaadayo   
raajasaah, vyaadhyaadayah taamasaah |*** *Vishnu*, through His *shakti * of *sattva, rajas * and *tamas*, through *Manu, **Mareechi, Daksha*, and these forms, He does *srushti, sthiti, pralaya*. When He takes the form of *sattva*, through *Manu * and others, He becomes the cause of sustenance. When He takes the form of *Daksha * and others, being *antaryaami * of those *chetanaas, rajas * is high, and He gets creation done. When *taamasa * is high, He takes the form of *Vyaadhi * and other *chetanaas*, and through them, gets destruction done. 



***Atha nitya pralayasya svaroopam darshayan prasangaat pralayasya   
chaturvidham aaha naimittika ityaadinaa | Naimittika iti | Aatyantika   
iti | Naimittika aadi layeshu sushupti utkraantyoh cha jeevasya   
paramaatmani laye api karma kshaya abhaavaat punarbhavo vidyate |   
Aatyantike tu nisshesha karma avidyaadi naashaat na punarbhava iti   
visheshah |*** In order to tell about *nitya pralaya, Paraasharar * starts to explain about four types of *pralaya * here. There are four *pralayas * told - *Naimittika, **Praakrutika, Aatyantika, Nitya*. In the daily deaths we see, the *jeevaatman * goes and joins into *Paramaatman*, and from body to body; this is called *samsaara, samyak sarati*. During *Naimittika pralaya * also, when *Chaturmukha Brahma * sleeps, they go and join into *Paramaatman*. In *Praakruta pralaya, Chaturmukha Brahma * and *Brahmaanda * also get merged. In all these three *pralayaas*, the *jeevaatman * goes and joins *Paramaatman*, but for the *jeevaatman*, the *karmaas * are still existing and not destroyed completely; so they are again born; when *Praakruta * [[273]] *srushti * happens after *Praakruta pralaya*, they are again born. After *Naimittika pralaya * also, and *nitya pralaya * also, they are born again. In all these *pralayaas*, *karma * is not completely destroyed. Every day in *sushupti*, we go and join *Paramaatman*. When we leave the body to take on another birth, *utkraanti*, also, *jeevaatman * goes and joins *Paramaatman. **Laya * is *ekee bhaava*, and not losing the *svaroopa * of *jeevaatman*; but *jeevaatman * goes and joins *Paramaatman * as though they cannot be differentiated. In all these cases, *karma * is still there and not destroyed completely. In order to experience the fruits of those *karmaas, **punya * and *paapa*, again they are born. Whereas in the case of *Aatyantika **pralaya*, *karma * and *avidyaa * are completely destroyed, and because of this, one is not born again; they go to *Parama Pada * and join *Paramaatman * and are eternally liberated from this *samsaara*. 





## 44
Now, about creations are told. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 44:  *** ***Prasootih prakruteh yaa tu saa tushtih praakrutaa smrutaa |*** ***Dainandinee tathaa proktaa yaa antara pralayaadanu ||*** After *praakruta pralaya*, again *srushti * happens. This is called *praakruta **srushti. Dainandina stushti * is the *srushti * which happens after *naimittika **pralaya*; whatever *Chaturmukha Brahma * creates after sleeping for his night. 





## 45
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 45:  *** ***Bhootaani anudinam yatra jaayante munisattama |*** ***Nitya sargo hi sa proktah puraanaartha vichakshanaih ||*** Those who know the meanings of the *Puraanaas * very well, by them, *nitya **sarga * is told as every day when beings are being born, O Sage. 



 [[274]] Four kinds of *pralaya * were told - *Nitya, Naimittika, Praakruta, Aatyantika*. In the first three, there is *srushti*, whereas in *Aatyantika*, there is no *srushti*, because they are liberated once and for all, and there is no *karma*. So three kinds of *srushti * are told - *Praakruta **srushti * after *praakruta pralaya, dainandina srushti * after *naimittika pralaya, **nitya srushti * is after *nitya pralaya*. 





## 46
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 46:  *** ***Evam sarva shareereshu bhagavaan bhoota bhaavanah |*** ***Samsthitah kurute vishnuh utpatti sthiti samyamaan ||*** All these things happen not being controlled by anyone else, but by *Paramaatman Vishnu * only. *Vishnu * only does these creation, sustenance, dissolution, being present as the inner controller in all the bodies. He is untouched by all these defects. He is endowed with *Shaadgunya*. 





## 47
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 47:  *** ***Srushti sthiti vinaashaanaam shaktayah sarva dehishu |*** ***Vaishnavyah parivartante maitreya aharnisham samaah ||*** *Rajas, sattva * and *tamas shaktis * were told to be the cause of *srushti, sthiti, **laya*, in all these embodied beings. They are all controlled and being done repeatedly by the mere willing, *sankalpa * of Vishnu. It happens daily without break. 





## 48
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 7, Shloka 48:  *** ***Gunatrayam ayam hi etat brahman shakti trayam mahat |*** ***Yo atiyaati sa yaatyeva param naavartate punah ||***  [[275]] The three *shaktis * are said to be *guna trayaas, sattva, rajas * and *tamas*. One who crosses over all these effects of *sattva, rajas, tamas*, such *yogis * go and attain *Paramaatman*, and do not come back again. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Srushti iti | Vaishnavyah vishnu sankalpa anuvartinyah shaktayah   
sattvaadyaah, aharnisham sadaa avicchedhena | Sarvo api jano vishnu   
shakti preritah kaala bhedaat vishaya bhedaat cha sargaadi karoti |*** Those which are controlled by the mere willing of Vishnu, all beings are being impelled by *Paramaatman's shakti*. Based on the time and object under consideration, creation, sustenance, destruction happen, being controlled by *Paramaatman Vishnu * only. 



*Paraasharar * talks about four kinds of *pralaya*, and three kinds of *srushti*. Though *Daksha * and *prajaapatis, Manu * and his sons, and *Vyaadhi * and others are all responsible, they are all being controlled by *Vishnu * only, being *antaryaami*. Things are done according to the *karmaas * of the *chetanaas*. Those who cross over the effects of these *guna trayaas, **sattva, rajas, tamas*, they attain *Paramaatman * and are never born again. 



With this, the Seventh Chapter comes to an end. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Prathame Amshe Saptamo Adhyaayah ||*** 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Prathame   
Amshe Saptamo Adhyaayah ||*** 



***|| Atha Ashtamo Adhyaayah ||***  [[276]] 


