+++
title = "08"

+++


*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 1: *** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Kathitah taamasah sargo brahmanaste mahaa mune |*** ***Rudra sargam pravakshyaami tat me nigadatah shrunu ||*** The *taamasa sarga * of *Chaturmukha Brahma * was told, O great sage. Continuing from that, *Rudra sarga * is going to be told now. Listen to this *Rudra sarga*, the creation of the *Rudras*, now. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Nitya pralaya hetoh adharmaadeh taamasasya prasangaat bhrugu   
sargam atikramya poorva ukta koumaara sarga antargatam taamasam   
rudra sargam prapanchayitum prastouti kathita iti |*** The cause of *nitya pralaya*, the destruction that keeps happening on a daily basis, *adharma * and others which are because of *tamas*, skipping the *Bhrugu **sarga*, whatever was told earlier in the *koumaara sarga*, within this *koumaara sarga * the *taamasa Rudra sarga * happens, this will be explained now. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 2: *** ***Kalpaadou aatmanah tulyam sutam pradhyaayatah tatah |*** ***Praaduraaseet prabhoranke kumaaro neela lohitah ||*** In the beginning of the *kalpa*, he wanted to get a son who is very similar to himself. So, *Chaturmukha Brahma * started to do *sankalpa*. At that time, *Neelalohota * was born on his lap. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 3: ***  [[277]] ***Ruroda su svaram so atha praadravat dvijasattama |*** ***Kim rodishi iti tam brahmaa rudantam pratyuvaacha ha ||*** He cried loudly making lot of noise. And he started moving here and there. *Chaturmukha Brahma * asked him why are you crying like this. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 4: *** ***Naama deheeti tam so atha pratyuvaacha prajaapatih |*** ***Rudrastvam deva naamnaasi maa rodeeh dhairyam aavaha |*** ***Evam uktah punah so atha sapta krutvo ruroda vai ||*** He said, 'Give me a name'. *Prajaapati * replied 'You are going to be called *Rudra deva*. Do not cry. Be bold, courageous'. After that, the *Neelalohota*, after having got the name of *Rudra*, again cried seven times. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Naama iti | Rodana dravanaabhyaam rudra naama niruktih | \*   
Rodanaat dravanaat cha eva rudra naamnaa abhivishrutah | \* iti vaayu   
ukteh |*** The *nirukti * for the word *Rudra * is *Rodana dravanaabhyaam*, because of crying and moving here and there. In *Vaayu Puraana*, it is told like this. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 5: *** ***Tato anyaani dadou tasmai sapta naamaani vai prabhuh |*** ***Sthaanaani cha eshaam ashtaanaam patneeh putraamscha sa prabhuh   
||***  [[278]] Then *Chaturmukha Brahma * gave him another seven names. He gave *Rudra * and the other seven places also, gave them wives and children also. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 6: *** ***Bhavam sharvam asheshaanam tathaa pashupatim dvija |*** ***Bheemam ugram mahaadevam uvaacha sa pitaamahah ||*** He gave names to the seven people as *Bhava, Sharva, Eeshaana, Pashupati, **Bheema, Ugra, Mahaadeva*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Naamaani rudra bhava aadeeni, patneeh suvarchalaa   
aadikaah |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 7: *** ***Chakre naamaani atha etaani sthaanaani eshaam chakaara sah |*** ***Sooryo jalam mahee vanhih vaayuh aakaasham eva cha |*** ***Deekshito braahmanah soma iti etaah tanavah kramaat ||*** He also gave them forms, *Soorya, Jala, Mahee \(Pruthivi\), Vanhi, Vaayu, **Aakaasha, Deekshita braahmana \(braahmana * who has taken *deekshaa * in *yajnyaas\), Soma \(Chandra\)*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 8: *** ***Suvarchalaa tathaa eva oshaa sukeshee chaaparaa shivaa |*** ***Svaahaa dishah tathaa deekshaa rohinee cha yathaakramam ||***  [[279]] He gave wives which are *Suvarchalaa, Oshaa, Sukeshi, Shivaa, Svaahaa, **Dishaa, Deekshaa, Rohinee. * 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Chakre naamaani iti | Atra vanhih vaayuh iti paatha kramo na   
vivakshitah, agneh devataa patnee putraanaam pashupati svaahaa   
skandaanaam panchama sthaane vakshyamaanatvaat |*** The *paatha krama * is told as *Vanhi \(Agni\), Vaayu. * In the *artha krama*, we have to take it the other way, *Vaayu * and *Agni*. Because, when the wives are told, *Svaahaa * is the wife of *Agni*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 9: *** ***Sooryaadeenaam dvija sreshta rudraadyaih naamabhih saha |*** ***Patnyah smrutaa mahaabhaaga tat apatyaani me shrunu ||*** *Soorya*, water, earth, etc. are the forms and the names are *Rudra * and others which were given. Along with the names called *Rudra * and others, *Soorya * and others, listen to their children. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sooryaadeenaam iti | Sooryaadeenaam rudra moorteenaam |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 10: *** ***Eshaam sooti prasootibhyaam idam aapooritam jagat |*** By whose children and grand children, this entire world is filled. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[280]] ***Eshaam iti | Sooti prasootibhyaam sootih putraadih prasootih   
poutraadih |*** *Sooti * is children, *prasooti * is grand children. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 11: *** ***Shanaischarah tathaa shukro lohitaango manojavah |*** ***Skandah sargo atha santaano budhah cha anukramaat sutaah ||*** *Shanaischara, Shukra, Lohitaanga, Manojava, Skanda, Sarga, Santaana, **Budha*, are the children. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 12: *** ***Evam prakaaro rudro asou sateem bhaaryaam aninditaam |*** ***Upayeme duhitaram dakshasya eva prajaapateh ||*** In this way, *Rudra * takes *Daksha Prajaapati's * daughter *Sati * as his wife. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Evam iti | Sateem satee naamneem |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 13: *** ***Dakshakopaat cha tatyaaja saa satee sa kalevaram |*** ***Himavat duhitaa saa abhoot menaayaam dvija sattama ||*** Because of the anger of *Daksha, Sati * gave her body, she sacrificed herself. Then she became the daughter of *Himavaan * and *Menaa*, called *Uma*. 





 [[281]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 14: *** ***Upayeme Punah cha umaam ananyaam bhagavaan harah ||*** *Rudra * again marries her. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 15: *** ***Daivo dhaatru vidhaataarou bhrugoh khyaatih asooyataa |*** ***Shriyam cha deva devasya patnee naaraayanasya yaa ||*** From *Bhrugu, Khyaati * gives birth to two *devaas Dhaatru * and *Vidhaatru*, and also *Lakshmi*, who became wife of *Sriman Naaraayana*. 



*Maitreyar * asks for this story, and this continues now. The story of *Amruta **Manthana*, and how *Maha Lakshmi * was born there will now continue. 



***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying *Amsha * 1, Chapter 8, where the *prakarana * where *Rudra * married *Uma * was told. We studied the *Rudra sarga*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 15: *** ***Devou dhaatru vidhaataarou bhrugoh khyaatih asooyataa |*** ***Shriyam cha deva devasya patnee naaraayanasya yaa ||*** After this *Paraasharar * says that *Bhrugu * and *Khyaati * got married. *Khyaati * gave birth to two *devaas, Dhaatru * and *Vidhaatru*. And also the consort of Lord *Naaraayana*, the Lord of all Gods, *Shridevi* was born of *Bhrugu * in *Khyaati*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 16: ***  [[282]] ***Maitreyah - *** ***Ksheeraabdhoh shreeh samutpannaa shrooyate amruta manthane |*** ***Bhrugoh khyaatyaam samutpannaa iti etat aaha katham bhavaan ||*** *Maitreyar * asks - I have heard that in the *Ksheeraabdhi*, the milk ocean, when *devaas * and *asuraas * did churning of the ocean to get *amruta*, at that time, *Shree * was born. Now, you are telling that She was born of *Bhrugu * and *Khyaati*, how is this possible. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Maitreyah chodayati - ksheeraabdhou iti |*** 



*Paraasharar * now starts to answer this. While answering, he starts to tell the nature of *Shridevi, Mahaalakshmi, svaroopa, svabhaava*, and also how *Shree * and *Naaraayana * are ever associated. The *Amruta Mathana **prakarana * will come later. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 17: *** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Nitya eva eshaa jaganmaataa vishnoh shreeh anapaayini |*** ***Yathaa sarvagato vishnuh tathaa eva iyam dvijottama ||*** *Shree * is ever inseparably associated with *Vishnu*, She is the mother of the whole world, She is eternal. Just as *Vishnu * is all pervading, She is also all pervading. 



This is an often quoted *shloka * in commentaries. 



 [[283]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Pariharati - nitya iti | Vishnoh jagat pituh vishnoh anapaayinee eshaa   
jagat maatrutvena tadvat nityaa | Tasyaah cha vishnoh iva   
aavirbhaava tirobhaavou stah | Saa poorvam bhrugoh sutaatvena   
aavirbhootaa, paschaat indrasya doorvaasasah shaapat tirobhootvaa   
amruta mathane praadurbhootaa | Ato na virodhah | Yathaa iti | Sarva   
gato vishnuh yathaa yat svabhaavah, iyam api tathaa tat svabhaavaa   
iti, vishnoh sarvagatatva satya jnyaana aadi svaroopa kalyaana   
gunaadinaam atideshah | Athavaa bhagavaan vibhutvena sarva gatah,   
asyaah tat shakti vashaat anutve api tatra tatra sandhaanaat sarva   
gatatvam uktam | Iyam cha sarva gataa |*** *Jagat pitaa * is *Vishnu*, the father of the whole world. She is ever associated with Him, and is the mother. They are the father and mother of this whole world. Just like *Vishnu*, She is also eternal. For Her also, just like *Vishnu*, She also manifests, and ends Her *avataaraas*, incarnations, many times. First, She was born as the daughter of *Bhrugu*. After that, *Doorvaasa **Rishi * curses *Indra*, and at that time, She disappears, and again manifests during the churning of the ocean. So, there is no contradiction here. The all pervading *Vishnu*, whatever nature He is, She is also of the same nature. The attributes of *Vishnu * such as all pervasiveness, His essential, substantive nature being of *satyatva, jnyaanatva, anantatva, amalatva, aanandatva*, etc., all the innumerable auspicious qualities of *Vishnu, vaatsalya, **soulabhya, sousheelya*, etc., they are all extended in Her also. Or, *Bhagavaan * is all pervasive in His essential nature itself. She is His *shakti*, and though She is *anu*, She is there everywhere, and can be perceived in all places; She is also all pervasive. 



Here there are some aspects we have to see. *Shrutis*, tell about *Shridevi * and *Vishnu * both. Though they may not express the words *vibhu * and *anu * in some places, they tell that *Naaraayana * is supreme in some places, that *Shridevi * is supreme in other places. An *Upanishadic **vaakya "Ksharam pradhaanam amrutaaksharam harah ksharaatmanou **eeshate deva ekah*" says that *prakruti, pradhaana, avyakta * is *kshara, * [[284]] *chetanaas * are *akshara*, one Lord rules over *chetana * and *achetana*; tells *deva **ekah*, and does not talk about *Shridevi * there. " *Aaneedavaatam svadhaayaa **tadekam*", even during *pralaya*, when nothing exists, there is one *Brahman*, associated with *Shridevi. "Tasya madhye vanhi shikhaa aniyordhvaa **vyavasthitah neelato yata madhyasthaa vidyullekheva bhaasvaraa" * in *Mahaa **Naaraayana Upanishad*, says that *Paramaatman * is present in the heard, and *Shridevi * is also present as a streak of lightning there; *Bhagavaan * is like a dark cloud and *Shridevi * is like lightning. " *Sumajjaani*" tells about *Bhagavaan * who is ever associated with *Shridevi. "Vishvasya bhartree **jagatah pratishthaa, eeshaanaa devi bhuvanasya aadi patni, shraddhayaa **devo devatvam ashnute*", She is the support of the entire world, She rules over the entire world. " *Kum pradhaana eeshvara eeshvari*", She rules over even *Eeshvara*. 



*Paraashara Bhattar * says that " *Shruti * may not tell You in some places clearly, separately, because You are included in Him, You are ever associated with Him". Though they are two, they are told as One, they both rule over everything. 



There are two versions of *Vishnuchitteeya * itself. There is a version published in 1882 at Madras, edited by *Vavilla Anantanarayana Shastri*, and *Vaavilla Ramaswamy Shastri*. There is one more published earlier than 1882 in Telugu at Madras. This has the following commentary " *Yathaa iti **sarvagato vishnuh yathaa yat svabhaavah iyam api tathaa tat svabhaavaa **iti. Vishnoh sarvagatatvam pratyajnyaanaadi svaroopa kalyaana **gunaadeenaam atideshah. Athavaa bhagavaan vibhutvena sarvagatah iyam **cha sarva gataa" - anutva * is not mentioned. Among the followers of *Bhagavad Raamaanuja * also, there is a difference between *Vadagalai * and *Tengalai sampradaayaas*. In *Vadagalai*, they think that *Mahaalakshmi * is *vibhu svaroopa*, and in *Tengalai*, she is told as *anu **svaroopa*. 



 [[285]] Next, *Paraasharar * starts to explain the wonderful relationship of *Naaraayana * and *Mahaalakshmi*, how they both exist together. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 18: *** ***Artho vishnuh iyam vaani neetireshaa nayo harih |*** ***Bodho vishnuriyam buddhih dharmo asou satkriyaa tviyam ||*** *Shridevi * is the word, *vaani, shabda*, and *Bhagavaan * is the meaning, *artha*. They are eternally associated like that. *Shridevi * is *neethi*, and *Hari * is *naya. **Shree * is *buddhi * and *Bhagavaan * is *bodha*. *Dharma * is *Bhagavaan * and *Shree * is *y* *aaga * and others. 



In our *siddhaanta*, the relationship between *shabda * and *artha * is eternal, existing all the time. It is not that someone creates an object and associates a word with that. For example, *Devadatta * is born, and the *naamakarana * is done as *Devadatta*. There is a view that after an object is created only, a word can have a meaning; when there is no object, how can a word have a meaning? It is established in the *Shrutis * that *Bhagavaan * does creation with the words only. " *Veda shabdebhya eva aadou devaadeenaam chakaara sah*" says *Manu. Shruti * says " *Sa bhooriti vyaaharat sa bhuvam asrujata*", He said *Bhoo*, and created the world. " *Yathaa poorvam dhaataa akalpayat*". All these things show that the relationship between word and meaning is that the meaning is *antargata * in the *shabda * itself. They are ever associated and there is no need to associate an object with a word. Words like *Indra * are existing all the time, *apourusheya, nitya*, and the meaning always exists. This is examined in detail in various works. There is always an Indra, they are called *pravaaha nityaas*. During creation, *Bhagavaan * takes the *Veda **shabda*, and looking at the characteristics, associates the object with the word. The meaning is the *svaroopa * of the *shabda * itself. *Bhaashyakaarar * establishes all of this in three *sutraas * of *Brahma Sutraas*. 



 [[286]] This is also the reason why *Kaalidaasa * says ' *Vaagarthou iva sampruktou **vaagartha pratipattaye*'. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tayoh sarvaatmakatvam anapaayitvam cha upapaadayati artha iti |   
Arthah shabda vaachyah, neetih nyaaya shaastram | Nayo nyaayah |   
Buddhih adhyavasaayaatmakam antahkaranam, tat kaaryo nischayo   
bodhah | Satkriyaa yaagaadih | Dharmah tat utpaadyamadrushtam |*** Everything is *ubhaya aatmaka, Bhagavaan * and *Shree * are ever associated. Both are there always. Everything has *Vishnu * and *Lakshmi * as their *aatmaa*; they both together control and support everything, and both together are the masters. Word and meaning have *vaachya vaachaka sambandha, **vaachaka * is the *shabda*, and *vaachya * is the object denoted by the word, this is *artha. Nyaaya * is the way the concepts are presented, the *pancha **avayayava vaakya. Nyaaya shaastra * is that which houses all of these. *Buddhi * is the mind, when it is in the deciding mode, when it is taking a decision. When it is thinking, it is called *chinte*. Like this, there are different *prakaaraas*, modes of the mind. The effect of the deciding mind is the decision itself; the decision taken by such a mind is called *bodha*. *Sat **kriyaa * is all the good deeds told in the *Vedaas*, which is *yaagaas*. From the *yaagaas, adrushta * is born, obtained, which is *Bhagvaan's sankalpa* to bestow various benefits. 



*Aalwaar * also says this in many places. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 19: *** ***Srashtaa vishnuriyam srushtih shreeh bhoomih bhoodharo harih |*** ***Santosho bhagavaan lakshmeeh tushtih maitreya shaashvatee ||*** The creator is *Vishnu*, and She is the creation. *Shree * is *bhoomi*, and He is the one who supports the *bhoomi*. O *Maitreya*, The idea of enoughness  [[287]] is *tushti*. The happiness that arises out of this, is *santosha. **Bhagavaan * is *santosha*, and *Lakshmi * is *tushti*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Srashataa iti | Alam buddhih tushtih | Tat abhivyaktam sukham   
santoshah, shaashvatee iti lakshmyaa visheshanam |*** *Shaashvati * is the attribute of *Lakshmi*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 20: *** ***Icchaa shreeh bhagavaan kaamo yajnyo asou dakshinaa tviyam |*** ***Aajyaahutih asou devee purodaasho janaardanah ||*** *Shree * is *icchaa*, and *Bhagavaan * is *Kaama*. If *Vishnu * is *yajnya*, She is *dakshinaa*, donation given during the *yajnyaas*. Every *yajnya * is never complete without *dakshinaa. Shree * is the *aajyaahuti*, the ghee which is offered as oblation, and *Janaardana * is the *purodaasha*, the rice cake which is offered. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Icchaa iti | Icchaa apekshaa, tat janyo abhiniveshah kaamah |*** *Icchaa * is desire, and out of this, comes the wanting to attain that. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 21: *** ***Patneeshaalaa mune lakshmeeh praagvamsho madhusoodanah |*** ***Chitih lakshmeeh harih yoopa idhmaa shreeh bhagavaan kushah ||*** *Lakshmi * is the *patneeshaalaa*, the place where the women folk sit, and *Madhusoodana * is the *praagvamsha*, the front portion where  [[288]] the *yajamaana * sits. She is the altar, and *Bhagavaan * is the *yoopastambha*. If *Bhagavaan * is *darbhaa*, She is like the *samit*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Patneeshaalaa iti | Idhmaa samit | Aarshatvaat taap |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 22: *** ***Saama svaroopi bhagavaan udgeetih kamalaalayaa |*** ***Svaahaa lakshmeeh jagannaatho vaasudevo hutaashanah ||*** *Bhagavaan * is *saama svaroopa * itself. She is a special type of that *saama*. If *Vaasudeva * is like the *Agni*, She is like the *Svaaha Devi*, who is wife of *Hutaashana, Agni*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Saama svaroopi iti | Sagaano mantrah saama, tat gaana vishesha   
udgeetih |*** *Saama * is *mantraas * which are sung. A special type of such *saama * is called as *udgeeti*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 23: *** ***Shankaro bhagavaanchourih gouri lakshmeeh dvijottama |*** ***Maitreya keshavah sooryah tat prabhaa kamalaalayaa ||*** If He is like *Shankara*, She is like *Gowri*. If *Keshava * is the Sun, the Sun's brightness is *Lakshmi*. 



 [[289]] There is *prabhaa * and *prabhaavat; prabhaavat * is the *Soorya*, and *prabhaa * is the rays emanating from the Sun. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 24: *** ***Vishnuh pitruganah padmaa svadhaa shaashvata pushtidhaa |*** ***Dyou shreeh sarvaatmako vishnuh avakaasho ati vistatarah ||*** *Vishnu * is like the *pitru gana*, the host of *pitrus*; and She is *Svadhaa*, which gives *pushti * all the time, *nitya pushti*. If She is like the sky, He is the broad space. 



For *pitrus*, when we offer, it is called *svadhaa*. For *devaas*, it is *svaahaa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 25:*** ***Shashaankah shreedharah kaantih shreeh tatha eva anapaayinee |*** ***Dhrutih lakshmeeh jagat cheshtaa vaayuh sarvatrago harih ||*** *Shreedhara * is the Moon, and the brightness of the Moon is *Shridevi*. She is the capability to support. The *Vaayu * is said to be *Bhagavaan*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Shashaanka iti | Vaayuh jagat praanah, dhrutih dhaaranam, jagat   
cheshtaa cha pravahaadi praanaadi roopa vaayu krutyam |*** *Vaayu * is the *jagat praana*, the life of the entire world. Air carries things with it, and gives life to beings through breathing - *praana, apaana, vyaana, **udaana, samaana *- these are the effects of *Vaayu*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 26:***  [[290]] ***Jaladhih dvija govindah tat velaa shreeh mahaa mune |*** ***Lakshmeeh svaroopam indraanee devendro madhusoodanah ||*** *Govinda * is like the ocean. *Shree * is said to be the shores. If *Madhusoodana * is like *Devendra*, then *Lakshmi * is like *Indraani*, the wife of *Devendra*. 



There is a *paatha * that *Shree * is the tide. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 27:*** ***Yamah chakradharah saakshaat dhoomornaa kamalaalayaa |*** ***Ruddhih shreeh shreedharo devah svayameva dhaneshvarah ||*** If He is *Yama * himself, She is the wife of *Yama, Dhoomornaa*. Lord *Vishnu * is *Kubera*, and She is *Kubera's * wife, *Ruddhi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yama iti | Yamasya patni dhoomornaa | Ruddhih kuberasya |*** *Dhoomornaa * is the wife of *Yama. Ruddhi * is *Kubera's * wife. 



It can also be taken as *Bhagavaan * being *antaryaami * to all of these. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 28:*** ***Gouri lakshmi mahaabhaaga keshavo varunah svayam |*** ***Shreeh devasenaa viprendra devasenaa patih harih ||*** If *Keshava * is like *Varuna, Lakshmi * is like *Varuna's * wife, *Gowri*. if *Shree * is *Devasenaa, Vishnu* is *Skanda*.  [[291]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Gowri iti | Gowri varunasya patni | Devasenaa skanda bhaaryaa |*** *Varuna's * wife is *Gowri. Skanda's * wife is *Devasenaa*. 



*Tayoh sarvaatmakatvam * is told. They are told in *saamaanaadhikaranya * to be those things. *Varuna * is *Keshavaatmaka. Gowri * is *Lakshmyaatmikaa. * Both are *ubhayaatmaka*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 29:*** ***Avashtambho gadaa panih shaktih lakshmeeh dvijottama |*** ***Kaashthaa lakshmeeh nimesho asou muhoorto asou kalaa tu iyam ||*** If *Bhagavaan * is like the *aadhaara, Lakshmi * becomes the power itself. One *kaashtaa * is fifteen *nimeshaas*. Similarly, *kalaa * is part of *muhoorta*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Avashtambha iti | Avashtambhah aadhaaro balam vaa |*** *Avashtambha * is support or power. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 30:*** ***Jyotsnaa lakshmeeh pradeepo asou sarvah sarveshvaro harih |*** ***Lathaa bhootaa jaganmaataa shreeh vishnuh druma sanjnitah ||*** If the light is *Bhagavaan*, brightness is *Lakshmi*. If *Bhagavaan * is the tree, She is the twiner.  [[292]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Jyotsnaa iti | Jyotsnaa prabhaa |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 31:*** ***Vibhaavari shreeh devo asou devah chakra gadaadharah |*** ***Varaprado varo vishnuh vadhooh padma vanaalayaa ||*** They are associated like night and day. He is the bridegroom, who gives all boons. *Mahaalakshmi * is like the bride. 



There is another *paatha, Vibhaavari shree divaso ... * 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 32:*** ***Nada svaroopi bhagavaan shreeh nadee roopa samsthitaa |*** ***Dhvajah cha pundareekaakshah pataakaa kamalaalayaa ||*** She is *nadi*, and He is *nada*. He is the flag, and She is the banner. 



*Nada * is the masculine gender of *nadi*. In the rivers also, it is told like that. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 33:*** ***Trushnaa lakshmeeh jagannaatho lobho naaraayanah parah |*** ***Rathee raagascha maitreya lakshmeeh govinda eva cha ||*** *Trushnaa * is *Lakshmi*, and *Jagannaatha * is *lobha. Rathi * is *Lakshmi*, and *raaga * is *Govinda*.  [[293]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Trushnaa iti | Deyasya aaditsaa nishiddha lipsaa cha lobhah | Labdheh   
aparyaaptadheeh trushnaa | Ratih priya sangamajaa tat kaala preetih;   
tat prakarsho raagah |*** Not being satisfied with whatever one gets is *trushnaa*; they want more and more all the time. Whatever is given in donation, wanting to possess that; and desiring to attain what is prohibited; is *lobha*. The happiness that arises out of union with the dear one, is *rathi*; and the excess of that is *raaga*. 





After telling how they are both associated, and how they are *ubhaya **aatmaka, Paraasharar * says. It is difficult to understand this aspect of Vishnu and Lakshmi being ever associated inseparably, was explained by so many examples. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 34:*** ***Kim cha atra bahunoktena sankshepena idam uchyate ||*** What else can I say, I cannot explain the relationship how they exist, I am telling you very briefly. 



There are two aspects of all that is told. That they are the inner controllers of everything, and are inseparably ever associated. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 8, Shloka 35:*** ***Deva tiryak manushy\(eshu\)aadou punnaamaa bhagavaan harih |*** ***Stree naamnee shreeh cha vijneyaa naanayoh vardhate param ||***  [[294]] In all these creations of gods, animal, human, all movables and immovables, whatever is told as man, male, is all *Bhagavaan*. Whatever is feminine, are *Shridevi's amsha*. There is nothing superior than these two. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Deva iti | Anayoh aabhyaam param anyat | Sarvasya ubhayaatmakatve   
api tatra tatra aabhimukhya atishaya visheshaat arthavaani   
aadeenaam tat aatmakatvam uktam |*** Why only so few examples like *artha, vaani*, etc. Everything has these two as their inner selves, in some places there is a special presence of them that is seen. That was only told here. These are all the examples where this relationship is significantly seen. The examples were told only in specific places, though they are inner controller of everything, and there is nothing superior to them. 



***|| Om Tat Sat iti Shree Vishnu Puraane Prathama Amshe Ashtamo   
Adhyaayah ||*** 



***|| Iti Shree Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Prathame   
Amshe Ashtamo Adhyaayah || *** 





***|| Atha Navamo Adhyaayah ||*** 



Here comes the *prakarana * if *Durvaasa Muni * and *Indra*, and the churning of the ocean comes after this. 



 [[295]] *Maitreyar * had asked about *Shridevi*, Her nature, and how She was also born as daughter of *Bhrugu * and *Khyaati * and also manifests during *Amrutha **Mathana*. Now, *Paraasharar * starts to explain the second part of it. 


