+++
title = "09"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 1: *** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Idam cha shrunu maitreya yat prushto aham iha tvayaa |*** ***Shree sambandham mayaa api etat shrutam aaseet mareechitah ||*** O *Maitreya*, listen to this also, I am going to tell you more, which is connected to *Shridevi*, which I heard from *Mareechi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Idam iti | Mareechih kaashyapa pitaa |*** *Mareechi * is the father of *Kaashyapa*. 



He told me that story, I will tell you. 





## 2
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 2: *** ***Doorvaasaah shankarasya amshah chachaara pruthiveem imaam |*** ***Sa dadarsha srajam divyaam rushih vidyaadharee kare ||*** *Durvaasa Rushi * is well known for his anger, is *Shankara's amsha*, was roaming around in the world. He saw a wonderful divine garland, in the hand of a *Vidyaadhara stree*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[296]] ***Doorvaasaah iti | Shankarasya amsha iti vakshyamaanaa   
akshyaantyaadeh hetu nirdeshah |*** *Durvaasa * is very intolerant, *akshaanti*. He curses people for the slightest of mistakes, as well known in the *Puraanaas*. The cause of the *akshaanti * is said that he is *amsha * of *Shankara*, as *Shankara * also is said to be like that. 





## 3
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 3: *** ***Santaanakaanaam akhilam yasyaa gandhena vaasitam |*** ***Ati sevyam abhoot brahman tat vanam vanachaarinaam ||*** It had the wonderful perfume of the flowers of *Santaanaka*. With this, the entire forest was having a wonderful fragrance of these flowers, which was most pleasant. 





## 4
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 4: *** ***Unmatta vrata dhruk viprah taam drushtvaa shobhanaam srajam |*** ***Taam yathaache varaarohaam vidyaadhara vadhoom tatah ||*** *Durvaasa Rushi * was highly attracted by that garland. He was following the *vrata * of behaving like an *unmatta*, inebriated. He begged her to give him that garland. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Unmatta iti | Unmatta vrata dhruk | Yogino hi jada unmatta   
pishaachavat vartante | Athavaa sanatkumaara shaapaat unmatta   
vrata dhruk |*** There is an instance of *Sanatkumaara shaapa* for *Durvaasa*, because of which he was as though inebriated. It is also said that yogis behave like this. *Yogis* when they are in *aatma anubhava*, behave like inert  [[297]] objects, *jada*, without realizing anything that is happening around. Or as though they are in an inebriated condition. 





## 5
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 5: *** ***Yaachitaa tena tanvangee maalaam vidyaadharaanganaa |*** ***Dadou tasmai vishaalaakshee saadaram pranipatya tam ||*** Immediately that *vidyaadhara stree* offered her obeisance to the *rishi*, and with great respect, gave him that garland. 





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 6: *** ***Taam aadaaya aatmano moordhni srajam unmatta roopa dhruk |*** ***Krutvaa sa vipro maitreya paribabhraama medineem ||*** He placed that garland on his head, *Durvaasa Muni * roamed around the whole world as though in an inebriated condition. He was so happy with the fragrance of that garland. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 7: *** ***Sa dadarsha tam aayaantam unmatta airaavate sthitam |*** ***Trailokya adhipatim devam saha devaih shacheepatim ||*** At that time, he saw *Indra*, the Lord of the gods, the Lord of the three worlds, coming there, sitting on the *Airaavata * elephant, which was also like *unmatta*; along with all the gods. 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 8: *** ***Taam aatmanah sa shirasah srajam unmatta shat padaam |***  [[298]] ***Aadaaya amara raajaaya chikshepa unmattvat munih ||*** The garland was surrounded by bees, and had a wonderful fragrance. *Durvaasa Muni * threw it at *Indra*. 





## 9
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 9: *** ***Gruheetvaa amara raajena srak airaavata moordhani |*** ***Nyastaa raraaja kailaasa shikhare jaanhavee yathaa ||*** *Indra * took that garland, and placed it on *Airaavata * elephant. When he placed it on *Airaavata's * head, it was shining forth like *Ganga * river on *Kailaasa shikhara*. It was such a wonderful view. 



Next, the elephant throws it down, and *Durvaasa Muni * gets very angry, and curses *Indra*. After this, Indra loses all his wealth, and this is told as *tirodhaana * of *Shridevi*. The whole world loses all its prosperity. After that, they do *Amrutha mathana*, the churning of the ocean. ***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying *Amsha * 1, Chapter 9, where we were starting to study the part where *Durvaasa Muni*, when roaming around as a *yogi*, sees a *Vidyaadhara stree * carrying a wonderful garland, with most wonderful fragrance filling the entire area. He is so much attracted to it, and he begs her to give that garland, and she gives it to him with great respect. He carries it on his head, and is captivated by its fragrance. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 7: *** ***Sa dadarsha tam aayaantam unmatta airaavate sthitam |*** ***Trailokya adhipatim devam saha devaih shacheepatim ||***  [[299]] At that time, he saw *Devendra*, the husband of *Shachi Devi*, along with *devaas. Indra*, the ruler of three worlds, was coming, seated on *Airaavata*, which was in a very intoxicated state. 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 8: *** ***Taam aatmanah sa shirasah srajam unmatta shat padaam |*** ***Aadaaya amara raajaaya chikshepa unmattvat munih ||*** The garland which was covered by bees, he took it from his head, and gave it to *Indra*. 





## 9
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 9: *** ***Gruheetvaa amara raajena srak airaavata moordhani |*** ***Nyastaa raraaja kailaasa shikhare jaanhavee yathaa ||*** *Indra * took that garland from *Durvaasa Rishi*, and placed it on the head of *Airaavata*. It was shining forth like *Jaanhavi * river on the summit of *Kailaasa * mountain. 





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 10: *** ***Madaandhakaaritaa aksho asou gandhaa krishnena vaaranah |*** ***Karenaaghraaya chikshepa taam srajam dharaneetale ||*** The *Airaavata * got more intoxicated with that wonderful fragrance of the garland. It was attracted by that fragrance. The trunk of the elephant being the nose, having breathed in the scent, it was intoxicated, and threw the garland down on the ground. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[300]] ***Mandhaataa iti | Gandhaa aakrushtena iti paathaantaram | Karinaam   
karasya gandhaakrushtatvam tasya eva naasaatvaat |*** 





## 11
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 11: *** ***Tataschukrodha bhagavaan durvaasaa muni sattamah |*** ***Maitreya devaraajaanam kruddhah cha etat uvaacha ha ||*** Seeing this, *Durvaasa * got infuriated, and O *Maitreya*, the excellent sage *Durvaasa*, told *Indra * thus. 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 12: *** ***Durvaasaa uvaacha -*** ***Aishwarya mada dushtaatman ati stabdho asi vaasava |*** ***Shriyaa dhaama srajam yastvam maddattaam na abhinandasi ||*** *Durvaasa * said - You are having a lot of wealth, and because of that, you have become very arrogant. You don't give respect to elders. This wonderful garland that I had given you, you are not treating with respect. You are not showing any delight in keeping it. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Aishwarya iti | Stabdhah avinayoddhatah | Atra hetuh shriyeti | Shriyo   
dhaameti vaa paathah |*** Because of the wealth that you have, you are not showing respect. There is another *paatha * called *shriyo dhaama*. 



It can also be told that the garland bestows all kinds of prosperity. 





## 13
 [[301]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 13: *** ***Prasaada iti noktam te pranipaatah purah saram |*** ***Harshotpulla kapolena na chaapi shirasaa dhrutaa ||*** Having received the garland by me, you should have accepted it with great respect saying that 'I treat it as your *prasaada*, I am highly blessed', having paid obeisance to me. Feeling extremely happy, and expressing it, you should have worn it on your head. This was not done by you. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Prasaada iti | Te tvayaa |*** *Te * is to be taken as *tvayaa*, by you. 





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 14: *** ***Mayaa dattaam imaam maalaam yasmaat na bahu manyase |*** ***Trailokya shreerato moodha vinaasham upayaasyati ||*** For the reason that you are not giving due respect to this garland which was given by me, the prosperity of the three worlds will get destroyed, O ignorant one. 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 15: *** ***Maam manyase anyaih sadrusham noonam shakra bhavaan dvijaih |*** ***Ato avamaanam asmaasu maaninaa bhavataa krutam ||*** O *Shakra*, you thinking that I am just like other *rishis*, other *brahmins*. For that reason, being arrogant, you have shown disrespect to me. 





## 16
 [[302]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 16: *** ***Maddattaa bhavataa yasmaat kshiptaa maalaa maheetale |*** ***Tasmaat pranashta lakshmeekam trailokyam te bhavishyati ||*** For the reason that the garland that was given by me, was thrown by you on the ground, your three worlds will disappear from you, you will not have them. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Maddattaa iti | Pranashta lakshmeekam tirohita lakshmeekam | Atra   
pranashta shabdasya tirohitatvam arthah |*** The meaning for *pranashta * should be taken as that it will disappear from you. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 17: *** ***Yasya sanjaata kopasya bhayameti charaacharam |*** ***Tam tvam maam ati garvena devaraaja avamasyase ||*** The entire world of movables and immovables, tremble with fear if I am angered. Being arrogant, such sage that I am, you are showing disrespect to me. 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 18: *** ***Sri Paraashara uvaacha -*** ***Mahendro vaaranaskandhaat avateerya tvaraanvitah |*** ***Prasaadayaamaasa tadaa durvaasasam akalmasham ||*** Then *Devendra*, immediately got down from the *Airaavata*, hurriedly, bowed down to *Durvaasa Rishi*, who was blemishless, and tried to please him.  [[303]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Mahendra iti | Akalmasham saaparaadha shaape dosha abhaavaat |*** When someone has committed a mistake, if he is cursed by a sage, there is no defect on the part of the sage. 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 19: *** ***Prasaadyamaanaasya tadaa pranipaata purassaram |*** ***Prati uvaacha sahasraaksham durvaasaa munisattamah ||*** He paid obeisance and fell at the feet of *Durvaasa*, and tried to please him. The excellent sage *Durvaasa * told him. 



*Sahasraaksha * is the name of *Indra*. 





## 20
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 20: *** ***Durvaasaa uvaacha -*** ***Naaham krupaalu hrudayo na cha maam bhajate kshamaa |*** ***Anye te munayah shakra durvaasa samavehi maam ||*** O *Indra*, I am not kind hearted. Tolerance finds no place in me. Those who are tolerant and kind hearted, those sages are all different. Know me as *Durvaasa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Naaham iti | Anye te munayah, ye kshamaavantah |***  [[304]] Those sages who have a lot of tolerance are different, I am not one among them. 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 21: *** ***Gautamaadibhih anyaih tvam garvam aaropito mudhaa |*** ***Akshanti saara sarvasvam durvaasa samavehi maam ||*** Your arrogance has increased by the tolerance shown by *Gautama * and other *rishis*. Know me as *Durvaasa*, who is the essence of intolerance. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Gautamaadibhih iti | Gautamo hi ahalyaadharshakam tvaam   
sarvaangabhago bhaveti shaptvaa punah tvat prasaaditah sarvaanga   
netram chakre | Akshaanti saara sarvasvam naivam kaaraniko aham iti   
bhaavah |*** This instance of *Gautama, Ahalya * and *Indra * comes in *Ramaayana * and other places. *Indra * had a wrong relationship with *Ahalya*, and *Gautama * cursed him. In *Raamayana*, the curse is to be come infertile. In other *puraanaas*, the curse is for his body be covered by the female organ. *Indra * begs *Gautama*, and *Gautama * gets pleased, and changed the curse to have *Indras * entire body to have eyes instead, so he is called *Sahasraaksha*. So, *Gautama * got pleased when *Indra * begged him to forgive him. *Durvaasa * says that he is not a kind person. 





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 22: *** ***Vasishtaadyaih dayaa saaraih stotram kurvadbhih ucchakaih |*** ***Garvam gato asi yena evam maam api adya avamanyase ||***  [[305]] Even sages like *Vasistha * and others, who are the essence of compassion, they praise you in loud voices. Because of this, you have become very arrogant. You are showing a lot of disrespect to me. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 23: *** ***Jvalajjataa kalaapasya bhru kutee kutilam mukham |*** ***Nireekshya kah tribhuvane mama yo na gato bhayam ||*** When I get infuriated with anger, and my eyebrows are knotted, when my *jataa * is shining, looking at my face which is infuriated with anger, who is there in these three worlds who does not tremble with fear? 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 24: *** ***Na aham kshamishye bahunaa kimuktena shatakrato |*** ***Vidambanaam imaam bhooyah karoshi anunayaatmikaam ||*** O *Indra*, I don't want to tell anything more. I am not going to forgive you. Now you are showing more disrespect by trying to please me. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Na aham iti | Vidambanaa avamaanah |*** 





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 25: *** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Iti uktvaa prayayou vipro devaraajo api tam punah |*** ***Aaruhya airaavatam naagam prayayou amaraavateem ||***  [[306]] *Sri Paraashara *- Saying this, *Durvaasa Rishi * went off. *Indra * also went back to city *Amaraavathi * on his *Airaavata*. 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 26: *** ***Tatah prabhruti nisshreekam sa shakram bhuvana trayam |*** ***Maitreya aaseet apadhvastam samksheenoushadhi veerudham ||*** From that time onward, all three worlds were without any wealth and prosperity. All herbs and plants were not growing at all. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Nisshreekatvam bhogya vastu abhaava iva | Evam   
oushadhyaadi bhogya abhaavam tat saadhana yajnya satvaadi   
abhaavam cha aaha - samksheena ityaadinaa | *** There was no prosperity, enjoyment in the three worlds. Plants and trees were not growing, and because of this, *yajnya * could not be performed. 





## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 27: *** ***Na yajnyaah sam pravartante na tapasyanti taapasaah |*** ***Na cha daanaadi dharmeshu manah chakre tadaa janah ||*** From that time onwards, nobody was performing sacrifices, because nothing was available to them. Sages were not able to perform tapas. People never had any intention or mind to perform *daana, dharma*, etc. 





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 28: *** ***Nissattvaa sakalaa lokaa lobhaat upahata indriyaah |*** ***Svalpe api hi babhoovuh te saabhilaashaa dvijottama ||***  [[307]] All three worlds were without any *sattva*, they were all covered by *lobha * and all those bad qualities. They got liking to even small and meagre benefits and pleasures. 





## 29
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 29: *** ***Yatah sattvam tato lakshmeeh sattvam bhootyanusaari cha |*** ***Nisshreekaanaam kutah sattvam vinaa tena gunaah kutah ||*** Where there is *sattva guna * or *dhairya*, all the wealth will come. When there is *sattva, aishwarya * will happen. When there is no wealth or prosperity, where is the *sattva guna*? Where can they have good qualities? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yata iti | Sattvam dhairyam, sattva guno vaa | Bhootih lakshmeeh |   
Sattvat bhootyoh itaretara hetutvam | Gunaah satya shoucha   
sheelaadyaah | *** *Sattva * and *bhooti \(aishwarya\)* are mutually present. *Guna * means telling the truth, *shaastreeya shuddhi, sadaachaara*. 





## 30
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 30: *** ***Bala shouryaadi abhaavah cha purushaanaam gunaih vinaa |*** ***Langhaneeyah samastasya bala shourya vivarjitah ||*** *Bala, shourya * were absent without the *gunaas * of *satya, shoucha * and *sheela*. When these are absent, everything will be disrespected or dishonoured. 





## 31
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 31: *** ***Bhavati apadhvastamatih langhitah prathitah pumaan |***  [[308]] ***Evam atyanta nisshreeke trailokye sattva varjite ||*** When a person who was respected earlier is disrespected or dishonoured in society, his mind will be totally disturbed. Thus, with extreme absence of prosperity and good qualities, there was no *sattva * at all in the three worlds. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Bhavati iti | Prathitah prasiddhah pumaan, langhitah avajnyaatah   
pumaan, apadhvasta matih bhavati |*** 





## 32
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 32: *** ***Devaan prati balodyogam chakruh daiteya daanavaah ||*** At that time, *Diti's * children, the *daanavaas * started to wage a war against the *devaas * and tried to overpower them. 





## 33
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 33: *** ***Lobhaabhibhootaa nisshreekaa daityaah sattva vivarjitaah |*** ***Shriyaa viheenaih nissatvaih devaih chakruh tato ranam ||*** *Daityaas * by nature are without *sattva guna*, and do not have good qualities, their mind is always covered by *lobha * and such qualities. They, who were naturally without *sattva guna*, waged war against the *devaas* who had lost their good qualities and wealth. 





## 34
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 34: *** ***Vijitaa tridashaa daityaih indraadyaah sharanam yayuh |*** ***Pitaamaham mahaabhaagam hutaashana purogamaah ||***  [[309]] *Indra * and other *devataas * who were won over by the *daityaas*, making *Agni * as the leader, the front, went and took refuge in *Pitaamaha*, *Chaturmukha Brahma. * 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Vijitaa iti | Nisshreekatvaadi dosha saamye api gunavat prakruti   
prachyutaa devaa nirgunatva prakruti sthitaih daityaih nirjitaah |*** Both *devaas * and *asuraas * were *nisshreekaa. Devaas*, by nature were having good qualities and having lost them now, were won over by the *daityaas*. 





## 35
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 35: *** ***Yathaavat kathito devaih brahmaa praaha tatah suraan |*** ***Paraavaresham sharanam vrajadhvam asuraardanam ||*** When *Chaturmukha Brahma * was narrated all the story, he told the *Devaas * thus - the tormentor of the demons, who is none other than *Mahaa Vishnu*, who is the ruler of the entirety of sentients and non sentients, go and surrender unto Him. 





## 36
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 36: *** ***Utpatti sthiti naashanaam ahetum hetum eeshvaram |*** ***Prajaapati patim vishnum anantam aparaajitam ||*** The supreme Lord of everything, *Mahaa Vishnu*, does not have any cause; He is the cause of everything - *utpatti, sthiti, naasha*, creation sustenance destruction. *Vishnu * who is the Lord of even *Prajaapati*, who is endless, undefeatable. 



 [[310]] He has *desha kaala vastu pariccheda raahitya*. He is all pervading, in all objects at all times. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Utpatti iti | Ahetum svayam hetu rahitam \* Na cha asya kaschit janitaa   
\* ityaadi shruteh | Hetum sarvasya utpattyaadeh |*** He is without a cause, He is eternal, cause of everything. There is no creator for Him. He is the cause of creation of everything. 





## 37
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 37: *** ***Pradhaana pumsoh ajayoh kaaranam kaarya bhootayoh |*** ***Pranataartiharam vishnum sa vah shreyo vidhaasyati ||*** He is the cause of *pradhaana \(avyakta, achetana, moola prakruti*, primordial matter\) and *chetana *\(collectivity of all sentients\), the two unborns \(unmanifest and the sentients\), which are the effects. He is none other than Vishnu, who destroys the grief of all those who surrender unto Him. He will do all good to you. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Pradhaana iti | Ajayoh api kaaryatvam vikaaryatvaat svaroopa   
svabhaava anyathaa bhaavena cha |*** Though they are told as unborn and effects; if it is an effect, how can it be said to be unborn? Because it undergoes modifications, *kaarya * is *avasthaantaraapatti*, the cause takes a different state. 



*Pradhaana * continuously undergoes changes into *mahat, ahamkaara, pancha **bhootaas, pancha tanmaatraas; achetana * undergoes change in *svaroopa*, its  [[311]] essential nature itself. Sentients undergo change in their attributive knowledge; their *svaroopa * does not change, but *svabhaava * undergoes change; *dharma bhoota jnyaana * undergoes change because of karma. Both are eternal. In the unmanifest state, primordial matter is eternal. 





## 38
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 38: *** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Evam uktvaa suraan sarvaan brahmaa loka pitaamahah |*** ***Ksheerodasyottaram teeram taireva sahito yayou ||*** *Sri Paraashara - Chaturmukha Brahma * having told all the gods thus, he went to the northern shore of the Milky Ocean, along with all the gods. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Evam iti | Uttaram teeram uttaram koolam shaaka dveepaashritam |*** There is an island called *Shaaka Dveepa*. 





## 39
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 39: *** ***Sa gatvaa tridashaih sarvaih samavetah pitaamahah |*** ***Tushtaava vaagbhih ishtaabhih paraavara patih harim ||*** Having reached there with all the gods, they eulogized *Hari * with pleasing words, who is master of *para * and *avara*, the movables and immovables, the sentients and non sentients. 





## 40
Next comes the *Brahma Stuti* of *Paramaatman*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 40: ***  [[312]] ***Brahmovaacha -*** ***Namaami sarvam sarvesham anantam ajam avyayam |*** ***Loka dhaama dharaadhaaram aprakaasham abhedinam ||*** Brahma said - I pay obeisance to You, who is everything, who is the Lord of everything, who is all pervading, unborn, who does not undergo any change any time, immutable, residing place for everything in all the worlds, support of the earth, who is not revealed, who does not differentiate. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Namaami iti | Avyayam apakshaya aadi vikaara rahitam | Abhedinam   
bheda anarham |*** There is no *vikaara * for *Paramaatman*, He is immutable. He does not differentiate; those who take refuge in Him, He does not see whether it is an animal, or bird or demon or sage, whether he has good or bad qualities. He protects anyone who takes refuge in Him. As we see in *Kaakaasura, **Sugreeva, Vibheeshana*. 



Every entity in this universe undergoes six types of modification - *asti, **jaayate, vardhate, viparinamate, apaksheeyate, nashyati*. These are called *shat bhaava vikaaraas*. He is not subject to any of these, and is said to be *avyaya*. 



*Aprakaasham * means that it is not possible to see Him with all the *praakruta **chakshus. Na sandrushe tishthati roopam asya, na chakshushaa pashyati **kaschanainam. * With His *anugraha * only, His grace only, He can be seen by His devotees. If anyone can see Him, it is through His grace. 





## 41
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 41: ***  [[313]] ***Naaraayanam aneeyaamsam asheshaanaam aneeyasaam |*** ***Samastaanaam garishtham cha bhooraadeenaam gareeyasaam ||*** *Naaraayana * is more subtle than all subtle things. He is bigger than even the *lokaas*, the *Bhoo * and other *lokaas*. 



*Naaraayana * is a unique name of *Paramaatman*, and it has got two meanings, *Naaraanaam ayanam, Naaraah ayanam yasya sah, Tatpurusha **samaasa * or *Bahuvreehi samaasa*; He resides in everything as *antaryaami*, and He is the goal or refuge of everything. He is bigger than the big and smaller than the small. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Naaraayanam iti | Aneeyasaam aatmanaam |*** The most subtle entity is the self itself, the *aatmaas*, and He is more subtle than even the *aatmaas*. 



He is the inner controller of the *aatman * itself. He does *anupravesha * of the *aatman * also. 





## 42
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 42: *** ***Yatra sarvam yatah sarvam utpannam matpurassaram |*** ***Sarva bhootascha yo devah paraanaam api yah parah ||*** Starting with me, everything was created, everything resides in Him. All beings are He only. Everything is His body, His *prakaara * being His *shareera*. Everything is controlled by Him, supported by Him and ruled by Him. He is supreme even than the exalted ones. 



 [[314]] The *vyutpatti * of the word *Vaasudeva * is *sarvatra asou samastam cha vasati **atreti vai yatah, tatah sa vaasudeveti vidvadbhih paripathyate*. Everything resides in Him, and He resides in everything. Everything is supported by Him, being His *shareera*. 





## 43
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 43: *** ***Parah parasmaat purushaat paramaatma svaroopa dhruk |*** ***Yogibhih chintyate yo asou mukti hetoh mumukshubhih ||*** He is superior than even the *muktaas*, the liberated ones. He is Supreme in His essential nature. He is meditated by the *yogis*. By *mumukshus * who are desirous of liberation, He is meditated upon as the bestower of liberation. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Para iti | Parasmaat muktaat |*** 





## 44
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 44: *** ***Sattvaadayo na santeeshe yatra cha praakrutaa gunaah |*** ***Sa shuddhah sarva shuddhebhyah pumaan aadyah praseedatu ||*** He is the ruler of everything, Supreme ruler. In Him, the material qualities, *sattva, rajas * and *tamas * are not present. He is *apraakruta, divya*. He is more pure than all the pure things. One who is the cause of everything, let Him get pleased and grace us. 



*Sattva, rajas, tamas * are present in all things material, *prakruti, mahat, **ahamkaara, pancha bhootaas, pancha tanmaatraas, indriyaas, deha*. They are all various effects, states of *prakruti*. Whereas *Paramaatman * is *shuddha **sattva, apraakruta*.  [[315]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sattvaadaya iti | Atah sarva bhootebhyah shuddhah |*** He is purer than everything else. 





## 45
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 45: *** ***Kalaa kaashthaa muhoorta aadi kalaa sootrasya gochare |*** ***Yasya shaktih na shuddhasya praseedatu sa no harih ||*** His glories are not controlled by *kalaa, kaashthaa, muhoorta*, and the other time divisions. He is not controlled by time; He controls time also. One who is the purest, that *Hari*, let Him be pleased with us. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Kalaa iti | Shaktih lakshmeeh | Vigraha parijana paricchada aadi   
vibhootih | \* Kalaa muhoortaadi mayah cha kaalo na yat vibhooteh   
parinaama hetuh \* ityaadeh |*** All His wealth such as *vigraha, parijana, paricchada*, His divine auspicious form, the *nityaas * and *muktaas * who are serving Him all the time - all these put together are called as His *shakti, vibhooti*. 



In this *prakruti mandala*, everything is controlled and limited by time. Beyond a time, things do not exist. Even *Chaturmukha Brahma * has a limited life period of hundred years of his; after that, he gets merged and *pralaya * happens. Whereas in *Parama pada*, time is controlled by *Paramaatman*, and nothing is controlled by time there. 





## 46
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 46: ***  [[316]] ***Prochyate paramesho ajo yah shuddho api upachaaratah |*** ***Praseedatu sa no vishnuh aatmaa yat sarva dehinaam ||*** He is the inner controller of all embodied beings. Let Him be pleased with us, let Him grace us. A *mukta * is told as *shuddha * in the secondary sense. *Paramaatman * is the inner self of *muktaas * also. That *Vishnu * who is controller of all these - *muktaas * and *baddhaas*, let Him grace us. 



*Dehi * means one who has the *deha*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Prochyata iti | Upachaaratah | Shuddhah muktah, poorvam   
avidyaantargatatvena shuddhayabhaavaat yah shuddho api   
upachaaratah iti anvayah | Atra hetuh aatmaa yah sarva dehinaam iti   
|*** One who had *karma * earlier, and was impure; after getting rid of the *karma*, when he becomes a liberated self, becomes *shuddha*. A *mukta * even though told as *shuddha*, he is not *shuddha * all the time; at one time, he was *baddha*, a bound self, and then became *mukta*. Embodied selves are *ashuddha * because they are under the sway of karma. 



*Brahma's stuti*, the most wonderful prayer of *Chaturmukha **Brahma * continues. ***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying *Amsha * 1, Chapter 9, *Brahma Stuti*, where *Chaturmukha Brahma * along with all the *devaas * goes and prays to *Bhagavaan*, standing on the shore of *Ksheera Saagara*. They all surrender unto *Bhagavaan*. They have lost all their wealth. *Chaturmukha **Brahma * tells to the *devaas * to go and pray to *Bhagavaan*, and that He is the one who can actually help us in this trouble. 



 [[317]] *Brahma * starts to pray, extolling *Bhagavaan's * wonderful *svaroopa*, that *Bhagavaan * is *sarvaantaryaami, sarva gata*, everything is Him only, everything is His *prakaara * being His *shareera*. He said that 'You are superior to even the *muktaas*, the liberated ones; You are meditated upon by *yogis*, and are the cause of liberation, those who are desirous of liberation meditate upon You'. He is purer than everything that is pure; He is the *aadya*, the first, there is no one before Him. He does not have the *praakruta gunaas*, the material qualities of *sattva, **rajas * and *tamas * of *prakruti*, because He has an *apraakruta divya mangala **vigraha*. The various divisions of time are all controlled by *Paramaatman*. There is *kaala * in *Parama Pada* also, but *kaala * has no control there. Whereas in the *prakruti mandala*, everything is controlled by time. 



The word *shuddha * is used in many *shlokaas * here, and has different meanings. 





## 46
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 46: *** ***Prochyate paramesho ajo yah shuddho api upachaaratah |*** ***Praseedatu sa no vishnuh aatmaa yat sarva dehinaam ||*** *Bhagavaan * is said to be *upachaaratah shuddha*. One who is the inner controller of all embodied souls, *Vishnu*, let Him be pleased. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Prochyata iti | Upachaaratah | Shuddhah muktah, poorvam   
avidyaantargatatvena shuddhayabhaavaat yah shuddho api   
upachaaratah iti anvayah | Atra hetuh aatmaa yah sarva dehinaam iti   
|*** One who had *karma * earlier, and was impure; after getting rid of the *karma*, when he becomes a liberated self, becomes *shuddha*. A *mukta * even though told as *shuddha*, he is not *shuddha * all the time; at one time, he  [[318]] was *baddha*, a bound self, and then became *mukta*. Embodied selves are *ashuddha * because they are under the sway of *karma*. 





## 47
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 47:  *** ***Yah kaaranam cha kaaryam cha kaaranasya api kaaranam |*** ***Kaaryasya api cha yah kaaryam praseedatu sa no harih ||*** *Chaturmukha Brahma * eulogizes *Bhagavaan * that He is *kaarana avasthaa, **kaarya avasthaa*, everything is *Bhagavaan * only. The *kaarana * is different from *Bhagavaan*, who is also the cause of everything. *Prakruti * is also He only, and *mahat tattva * is also He only. He is *antaryaami * of everything, and that is all His *shareera*. He is *prakruti shareeraka brahma, mahat **shareeraka Paramaatman*. He is also the effect of the effect. Let that *Hari * be pleased with us. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yah iti | Kaaranam iti | Kaaranam prakrutih mahatah kaaranatvaat,   
kaaryam mahaan | Kaaranasya prakruteh api kaaranam brahma |   
Kaaryasya mahatah kaaryam ahamkaarah |*** Here, the meaning of *kaaranam * is *prakruti*, according to Commentary, because it is the cause of *mahat. Kaaryam * is *mahaan * or *mahat * itself, the effect of *moola prakruti*. He is the cause of even *moola prakruti*. He is *ahamkaara * which is the effect of *mahat*, which is the effect of *moola **prakruti*. 



*Moola prakruti * is eternal, how can He be said to be the *kaaranam*? He is the cause of sustenance, though it is eternal. It is due to *Paramaatman's **sankalpa * that it is eternal. He is only controlling it and supporting it. 





## 48
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 48: ***  [[319]] ***Kaarya kaaryasya yat kaaryam tat kaaryasya api yat svayam |*** ***Tat kaarya kaarya bhooto yah tatah cha pranataasma tam ||*** *Mahat, ahamkaara tattva*, and *pancha tanmaatraas*, and its effect the *bhoota panchaka*, He Himself is all these. The *kaarya * of *bhoota **panchaka*, which is *Viraat*, the *Anda*, then *Chaturmukha Brahma*, then the *jagat*, the world, all these are You only. 



This *shloka * has the usage of word *kaarya * many times. 



*Pranataah * means *prakarshena nataah*, we are bowing with great reverence. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Kaarya kaaryasya iti | Kaarya kaaryasya kaarya bhoota mahat   
kaaryasya ahamkaarasya kaaryam tanmaatra panchakam tasya api   
kaaryam bhoota panchakam, tat kaaryasya andasya kaaryam   
chaturmukhah, tatah cha kaaryam iti anushangah, tat kaaryam jagat,   
tat sarvam yah svayam eva tam pranataassma iyi anvayah |*** *Kaarya kaaryasya * means *ahamkaarasya*. First *kaarya * stands for *mahat*, and second *kaarya * stands for *ahamkaara. Ahamkaara tattva * modifies into *pancha tanmaatraas*. The effect of *tanmaatra panchaka * is *bhoota **panchaka*. Then the *Anda*, then *Chaturmukha Brahma*, then the world. He Himself is all of these means that He has all of these as His *shareera * and He is present as *antaryaami * of these, controlling everything. 





## 49
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 49: *** ***Kaaranam kaaranasyaapi tasya kaarana kaaranam |*** ***Tat kaaranaanaam hetum tam pranataassma sureshvaram ||***  [[320]] For *Chaturmukha Brahma*, the *anda * is the *kaarana*, then *bhoota panchaka*, and *tanmaatra panchaka*. The cause of these - *ahamkaara, mahat, moola **prakruti*, that Supreme Lord, we pay obeisance to. 



This *shloka * has the usage of word *kaarana * many times. Here it is told in the reverse order as the previous *shloka*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Kaaranam iti | Kaaranasya jagat kaaranasya chaturmukhasya,   
kaaranam andam, tasya kaaranam bhoota panchakam, tat kaaranam   
tanmaatra panchakam, tat kaaranaanaam ahamkaara mahat   
prakruteenaam hetum kaaranam | Kaarana avastham kaarya avastham   
cha sarvam tvam eva iti arthah |*** For *Chaturmukha Brahma, anda * is the cause; for *anda*, the cause is *bhoota **panchaka*, then *tanmaatra panchaka*. The cause of these, in reverse order, is *ahamkaara, mahat, moola prakruti*. First, He is told as *kaarana avasthaa*, and also *kaarya avasthaa*. 



The order of creation is *moola prakruti, mahat, ahamkaara*, etc. During *pralaya*, the *laya * order is that effects go and merge into their causes. In each one of these, they happen only because *Paramaatman * is *antaryaami*. It is not that *moola prakruti * itself becomes the cause of *mahat, mahat * becomes cause of *ahamkaara*, etc. *Mahat shareeraka Paramaatman * only becomes cause of *ahamkaara*. First, it is told in the *srushti * order, and then told in the *pralaya * order. In both of these, *Paramaatman * only is the cause in every single step. 





## 50
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 50: *** ***Bhoktaaram bhojya bhootam cha srashtaaram srajyam eva cha |***  [[321]] ***Kaarya kartru svaroopam tam pranataassma param padam ||*** The enjoyer and object of enjoyment, the creator and the created, everything is *Paramaatman * only. All the actions and the doers, the nature of all that is *Paramaatman * only. That which is attained is *Param padam*, that is also *Paramaatma svaroopa * only. Such a *Paramaatman*, we bow in reverence. 



It should be taken as *bhogya bhootam*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Bhoktaaram iti | Bhojyam bhogyam shabdaadi srujyam ghataadi   
kaaryam yaagaadi gatyaadi cha | Param padam paramam praapya   
sthaanam |*** *Bhogya * are the objects of senses - *shabda, sparsha, roopa, rasa, gandha. **Bhoktru * is the enjoyer. *Srashtaa * is the creator. *Srujya * is the *ghata, pata*, the objects which are created. *Kaaryam * is the actions like *yaaga, gati*, all kinds of movements, etc., everything is *Paramaatman*. The doers of all those are also *Paramaatman * only. *Param padam * has three meanings -*jeevaatma svaroopa*, the *Vaikuntha *\(the *sthaana* where *Paramaatman * resides\), *Paramaatma **svaroopa * itself. Here it means *Bhagavaan * only. 





## 51
After having eulogized *Bhagavaan * that He is what is seen in various states of effects or causes, if He is only present as cause and effect in various states, does He undergo any modifications, are there any defects in Him? These doubts are removed here. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 51: *** ***Vishuddha bodhavat nityam ajam akshayam avyayam |*** ***Avyaktam avikaaram yat tat vishnoh paramam padam ||***  [[322]] He is *parishuddha jnyaana svaroopa*, He is eternal, He is unborn, He is undeteriorating, He is immutable, does not change, He is unmanifest, not easy to see or know, He does not undergo any change, that Supreme nature of *Paramaatman*, we pay our obeisance. 



Though there are changes in His *shareera*, the *prakruti * undergoes change in its *svaroopa * itself, the *jeevaatmans * undergo change in their *dharma bhoota **jnyaana, Paramaatman * who is *shareeri, antaryaami*, does not undergo any change at any point of time. 





## 52
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 52: *** ***Na sthoolam na cha sookshmam yat na visheshana gocharam |*** ***Tat padam paramam vishnoh pranamaama sadaa amalam ||*** He is not the gross, He is not the subtle, He cannot be identified or denoted by any other attribute. He is everything. We cannot say that He is just *sthoola*; because He is also *sookshma*. If He is said to be *sookshma*, He is also *sthoola*. He is not mere that, He is that and everything else also. He is untainted by any defects of *prakruti * or *jeevaatmans*, even though He is existing as the *antaryaami * of everything. We pay obeisance to Him. 



*Asthoolam, ananu, ahrasvam, akaayam, avranam, Shruti * says so. He is not this, He is not that, etc. means that He is this also, He is that also, He is everything else also. 





## 53
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 53: *** ***Yasya ayuta ayuta amsha amshe vishva shaktih iyam sthitaa |*** ***Para brahma svaroopasya pranamaamah tam avyayam ||***  [[323]] This whole world, which is His *shareera*, which is also said to be His *shakti*, that *vishva shakti*, the *Parabrahma svaroopa*, a part of the ten thousandth part of the ten thousandth part of His *svaroopa*, that immutable *Paramaatman*, we pay obeisance to. 



*Shakti * is also one synonym for *shareera*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yasya iti | Ayutaamsho yah, tasya aayutaamsho yah, tasya amshe   
sthitaa merorivaanuh; paado asyetaadih vishva shaktih jaganmaayee |*** Take a ten thousandth part, and again divide into ten thousandth, a part of that, in that, the entire world is supported and is existing. One cannot even imagine His *svaroopa*. This whole world, the *prakruti mandala * is itself so huge, the whole thing is just a speck in His *svaroopa*. It is like an atom in front of *Meru parvata*. 





## 54
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 54: *** ***Yat yoginah sadaa udyuktaah punya paapa kshaye akshayam |*** ***Pashyanti pranave chintyam tat vishnoh paramam padam ||*** *Yogis * who are always engaged in meditating upon *Paramaatman*, who get the *saakshaatkaara * of *Paramaatman * through *Pranava*, who is meditated upon as the meaning of the *Pranava*, that *Vishnu's Parama Pada*, we bow to. When both the *bandhakaas punya * and *paapa * are got rid of, yogis get a direct vision of the Lord, who is to be meditated upon through *Pranava*. Such a wonderful *svaroopa * of *Paramaatman*, we bow unto. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yat iti | Akshayam iti paricchedah |***  [[324]] 





## 55
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 55: *** ***Yat na devaa na munayo na cha aham na cha shankarah |*** ***Jaananti parameshasya tat vishnoh paramam padam ||*** What else to say? That nature of *Paramaatman*, nobody can know, gods, sages, *Shankara*, and I also, cannot know, that wonderful *svaroopa * of *Vishnu*, we bow unto. 





## 56
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 56: *** ***Shaktayo yasya devasya brahma vishnu shivaatmikaah |*** ***Bhavanti abhoota poorvasya tat vishnoh paramam padam ||*** *Abhoota purvasya* – one before whom there was none, *yasya devasya* – that *Paramatman’s* – *brahmaa Vishnu shivaatmikaah shaktayah bhavanti – **Chaturmukha Brahma, Vishnu* and *Shiva* are the *shareeras* \( *Vishnu* is also said as *shakti* but *Vishnu* is actual manifestation of *Paramatman* is to be understood\), that *vishnoh paramam padam* – that *Vishnu’s* supreme form we prostrate unto. 





***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Abhoota poorvasya na bhootam poorvam yasmaat tasya, sa hi   
sarvasmaat poorvah | Bhoota poorvasya iti paathe bhootaanaam   
poorva iti |*** *Bhoota poorvasya* is also a *pathaantara* – in that case it means HE existed before all beings. 





## 57
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 57: ***  [[325]] ***Sarvesha sarva bhootaatman sarva sarvaashraya achyuta |*** ***Praseeda vishno bhaktaanaam vraja no drushti gocharam ||*** Lord of everything, the inner self of everything, everything is present as His form only, He is refuge to everything, everything is supported in Him, he does not have *chyuti * anytime, He is immutable. Please do grace us, we are all praying unto You, and do appear in front of us. 





## 58
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 58: *** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Iti udeeritam aakarnya brahmanah tridashaah tatah |*** ***Pranamya oochuh praseedeti vraja no drushti gocharam ||*** *Sri Paraashara * said - Listening to Brahma's prayer thus, all the gods bowed unto *Bhagavaan*, and said - 'Please do grace us, be pleased, do appear in front of us'. 





## 59
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 59: *** ***Yat na ayam bhagavaan brahmaa jaanaati paramam padam |*** ***Tat nataah sma jagat dhaama tava sarva gata achyuta ||*** If *Chaturmukha Brahma * also cannot know, then nobody else can know. That support of the entire world, Your wonderful nature, You are all pervading, O *Achyuta*, we prostrated unto You. 





## 60
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 60: *** ***Ityante vachasah teshaam devaanaam brahmanah tathaa |*** ***Oochuh deva rishayah sarve bruhaspati purogamaah ||***  [[326]] At the end of *Chaturmukha Brahma * and gods prayer to *Bhagavaan*, all the *devarshis*, starting with *Bruhaspati*, started to pray unto *Paramaatman * thus. 





## 61
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 61: *** ***Devarshayah oochuh - *** ***Aadyo yajnya punaam eedyah poorveshaam yasya poorvajah |*** ***Tam nataassma jagat srushtuh srashtaaram avisheshanam ||*** *Devarshis * said - The creator of even *Chaturmukha Brahma*, that *Paramaatman*, we prostrate unto, who is the very first one, He is the *yajnya purusha * Himself, One who is worshipped unto, one who is worthy of worship, He is earlier to even the earlier ones, the primeval one, there is no one who existed before Him, the creator of the world, He cannot be told with a particular *visheshana * or word, to Him, we bow unto. 





## 62
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 62: *** ***Bhagavan bhoota bhavyesha yajnya moorti dharaa avyaya |*** ***Praseeda pranataanaam tvam sarveshaam dehi darshanam ||*** O *Bhagavaan*, the Lord of all that was past, and that is going to come in the future, You are the Lord of everything, you are the *Yajnya moorthi dhara*, immutable, please do grace us, who have surrendered unto You, please do appear before us. 





## 63
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 63: *** ***Esha brahmaa sahaasmabhih saha roudraih trilochanah |*** ***Sarvaadityaih samam pooshaa paavako ayam saha agnibhih ||***  [[327]] This *Chaturmukha Brahma * along with all of us, with the *ekaadasha rudraas*, and *Shankara * himself with three eyes, along with *dvaadasha aadityaas*, along with all the *agnis*, ... 





## 64
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 64: *** ***Ashvinou vasavascha ime sarve cha ete marut ganaah |*** ***Saadhyaa vishve tathaa devaa devendrah cha ayam eeshvarah ||*** ... along with the *Ashwini Devataas*, the *ashta vasus*, along with the hosts of *maruts*, and the *saadhyaa * group of gods, the *vishve devaas*, and also *Devendra*, the lord of gods himself, ... 





## 65
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 65: *** ***Pranaama pravanaa naatha daitya sainyaih paraajitaah |*** ***Sharanam tvaam anupraaptaah samastaa devataa ganaah ||*** ... we are all surrendering unto You, we are only interested in surrendering unto You, and have surrendered unto You with great devotion, we have been won over by the army of *daityaas*, along with the hosts of *devataa **ganaas*, we have come and surrendered unto You. 





## 66
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 66: *** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Evam samstooyamaanah tu bhagavan shanka chakra dhruk |*** ***Jagaama darshanam teshaam maitreya parameshvarah ||*** *Paraashara * said - Thus being eulogized by all the gods, the *devarshis, **Chaturmukha Brahma * and everyone, *Bhagavaan * with all His *divya **aabharanaas * and *aayudhaas, Shanka, Chakra*, the Supreme Lord directly appeared before them, O Maitreya.  [[328]] 





## 67
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 67: *** ***Tam drushtvaa te tadaa devaah shanka chakra gadaa dharam |*** ***Apoorva roopa samsthaanam tejasaam raashim oorjitam ||*** All the gods saw His most wonderful form, carrying His *shanka, chakra, **gadaa*, the *divya aayudhaas*, the form was so wonderful and was not seen before, His *divya mangala vigraha * was a huge mountain of radiance. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tam iti | Apoorva roopa samsthaanam samasta loka vilakshana   
varnaanga sannivesham |*** The hue of the *divya mangala vigraha*, the various parts of the *divya **mangala vigraha*, was distinct and different from everything that can be seen in this world. It was so wonderful and unique. 





## 68
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 68: *** ***Pranamya pranataah poorvam santosha sthiti tekshanaah |*** ***Tushtuvuh pundareekaaksham pitaamaha purogamaah ||*** The beheld His form with rapt attention, they could not move their eyelids. Their eyes were fixed on His wonderful form. They again bowed unto Him. All the gods and *devarshis * starting with *Chaturmukha Brahma*, they praised Him, did *stotra*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Pranamya iti | Pranamya pranataah poorvam pranataa api bhaktyaa   
punah pranamya |***  [[329]] Out of great devotion, they bowed unto Him again and again. 





## 69
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 69: *** ***Devaah oochuh -*** ***Namo namo avisheshah tvam brahmaa tvam pinaaka dhruk |*** ***Indrah tvam agnih pavano varunah savitaa yamah ||*** *Devaas * said - We offer our *namaskaarams * to You again and again, One who does not see any special qualities in those who surrender unto Him, You are only *Chaturmukha Brahma*, You are only *Rudra * who is holding the *trishoola*, You are only Indra, You are only Agni, You are only *Pavana*, You are only *Varuna*, You are only *Savitaa*, You are also *Yama*, ... 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Namo nama iti | Avisheshah - sarva samah |*** Whoever surrenders unto *Bhagvaan*, He does not see any *vishesha * in them, about whether someone has good knowledge, or whether he is born in a good *kula*, etc. Whoever surrenders unto Him, without distinction, He protects them. We see that He protected a *kaakaasura*, a *vaanara*, a *raakshaasa * also. 



Here, the *saamaanaadhikaranya * told is that all are You only, that all are *bhagavat aatmaka*, that You are the inner self of all of them, they are all like *shareera bhootaas * to You, 





## 70
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 70: *** ***Vasavo marutah saadhyaa vishve deva ganaa bhavaan |*** ***Yo ayam tava agrato deva samasto devataa ganah |***  [[330]] ***Sa tvam eva jagat srashtaa yatah sarvagato bhavaan ||*** ... You are only *Vasavaas*, You are only *Maruts*, You are only *Saadhyaas*, You are only the host of *Vishve Devataas*. This entire host of gods, who are there in front of You, the entire thing is You only. You are the creator of the world, and You are all pervading. There is no place in which You are not there. There is no object in which You are not there. There is no time in which You don't exist. 



He has *desha kaala vastu pariccheda raahitya*. He is *satyam jnyaanam **anantam brahma*. 





## 71
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 71: *** ***Tvam yajnyah tvam vashatkaarah tvam onkaarah prajaapatih |*** ***Vidyaa vedyam cha sarvaatmam tvanmayam cha akhilam jagat ||*** You are only *yajnya*, You are also *vashatkaara*, You are also *Omkaara*, You are also *Prajaapati*. All the *Vidyaas * which are there, and all that is to be known, You are the self of everything. The whole world is made of You only. 



It can be taken as *Omkaara pratipaadya*, or as the name itself. 





## 72
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 72: *** ***Tvaam aartaah sharanam vishno aprayaataa daitya nirjitaah |*** ***Vayam praseeda sarvaatman tejasaa apyaayasva nah ||*** O *Vishnu*, Supreme Lord. We who are defeated by the *daityaas*, having lost all our power, wealth, prosperity, we have come and surrendered unto You. O all pervading Lord, the *antaryaami * of everything, please grace us, and make us get back our powers and capabilities.  [[331]] 





## 73
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 73: *** ***Taavat aartih tathaa vaancchaa taavat mohah tathaa ashukham |*** ***Yaavat na yaati sharanam tvaam ashesha agha naashanam ||*** Grief due to some loss, desire, *moha* \(delusion\) and *dukkha* – all these can be there only as long as one does not surrender unto YOU who are the destroyer of all sins. 





## 74
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 74: *** ***Tvam prasaadam prasanna aatman prapannaanaam kurushva nah |*** ***Tejasaam naatha sarveshaam sva shaktyaa aapyaayanam kuru ||*** Please be pleased with us, grace us, who have all surrendered unto You. With Your powers please make us get our *tejas*, let our capabilities and powers increase. 





## 75
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 75: *** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Evam samstooyamaanah tu pranataih amaraih harih |*** ***Prasanna drushtih bhagavaan idam aaha sa vishvakrut ||*** *Paraashara * said - With utmost pleasing glances towards all the gods, being eulogized wonderfully by all of them, by them who had surrendered unto Him, all the gods, *Bhagavaan*, the creator of the whole world, told them thus. 





## 76
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 76: *** ***Tejaso bhavataam devaah karishyaami upabrahmanam |***  [[332]] ***Vedaami aham yat kriyataam bhavadbhih tat idam suraah ||*** I will make your *tejas * increase. Whatever you have to do now, that I am going to tell you now, O gods. 



*Upabrahmana * is expansion. 





## 77
Now, He tells them to do the churning of the ocean. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 77: *** ***Aaneeya sahitaa daityaih ksheeraabdhou sakalaa oshadheeh |*** ***Manthaanam mandaram krutvaa yoktram krutvaa cha vaasukim ||*** Bring all the *oshadhees*, the various herbs, and throw them in the Milk Ocean, and do it along with the *daityaas*, make the *Mandara parvata * as the stick for churning, make *Vaasuki * serpent as the rope for churning, 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Aaneeya iti | Oshadheenaam vichitra shaktikatvat vichitra vastu   
utpattyartham aanayanam |*** The various herbs have the wonderful powers to create different types of wonderful objects. Bring all these herbs. 





## 78
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 78: *** ***Mathyataam amrutam devaah sahaaye mayi avasthite ||*** I am going to be present and helping you; churn the ocean in order to get *amruta*. 



 [[333]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Mathyataam iti | Amrutam mathyataam mathanena amrutam   
utpaadyataam |*** Do the churning and then generate *amruta*. 





## 79
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 79: *** ***Saama poorvam cha daiteyaah tatra saamaanya karmani |*** ***Saamaanya phala bhoktaaro yooyam vaachyaa bhavishyatha ||*** *Bhagavaan * tells the gods what to tell the *daityaas *- Tell them in good words, that this is a common activity for both, and that both will get the fruits that will come. Please come and take part in this common activity. 



The four ways of treatment are *saama, daana, bheda, danda. * 





## 80
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 80: *** ***Mathyamaane cha tatra abdhou yat samutpatsyate amrutam |*** ***Tat paanaat balino yooyam amaraah cha bhavishyatha ||*** Tell the *daityaas * that when we are going to churn this Milk Ocean, the *amruta * which is going to be generated, you will become very powerful and also immortal. 





## 81
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 81: *** ***Tathaa cha aham karishyaami te yathaa tridashadvishah |*** ***Na praapsyanti amrutam devaah kevalam kleshabhaaginah ||***  [[334]] I will do in such a way that those *asuraas * who are the enemies of gods they will not get *amruta*, they will only undergo sufferings and misery. 



When all the gods went and surrendered unto Him along with *Chaturmukha **Brahma, Bhagavaan * tells them to bring the *daityaas * also, and make them also part of this common activity, and tell them to partake the *amruta * which is going to be generated from this churning, and I will see to it that they will not partake this *amruta * but will only be subjected to all kinds of suffering and misery, and you will get all the benefits and get back all your wealth, powers and prosperity. 



Now, the *ksheera saagara mathana * will start. Sage *Paraasharar * will start to tell that. ***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying *Amsha * 1, Chapter 9, where *Chaturmukha Brahma, devaas * and *rishis * eulogize *Paramaatman*, and pray to Him to appear before them, He promptly appears revealing His wonderful auspicious form, they surrender unto Him, and say that they have lost all their glory, and pray to restore their glory. *Bhagavaan * tells them to "Do as I tell you, churn the *Ksheera Abdhi*, the Ocean of Milk, making *Mandara Parvata * itself as the staff, and the great serpent *Vaasuki * as the cord, include the *daanavaas*, and tell them that they will also get an equal portion of the *amruta * which is going to be generated from the churning. I will help you and see to it that they do not get the nectar of immortality, and you will get everything". *Paraasharar * says what happened after that. 





## 82
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 82: *** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Ityuktaa devadevena sarva eva tatah suraah |*** ***Sandhaanam asuraih krutvaa yatnavanto amrute abhavan ||***  [[335]] *Sri Paraasharar * said - Being told thus by the Supreme Lord, all the *devaas * made an agreement with the *asuraas * that they will get equal proportion of the *amruta * that they will get from this churning, and started to engage in churning of the ocean. 





## 83
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 83: *** ***Naanaa oushadheeh samaaneeya deva daiteya daanavaah |*** ***Kshiptvaa ksheeraabdhi payasi sharadabhra amalatvishi ||*** They brought various herbs, all the *devaas * and *daanavaas*, and threw them in the *Ksheera Abdhi*, it was as though the clouds of the *sharad kaala*, it was so pure and glowing. 





## 84
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 84: *** ***Manthanam mandaram krutvaa yoktram krutvaa cha vaasukim |*** ***Tato mathitum aarabdhaah maitreya tarasaa amrutam ||*** They made the *Manthara parvata * itself as the staff for churning, the great serpent *Vaasuki * was made as the rope for churning, and they started to churn the ocean with great speed in order to generate *amruta*. 





## 85
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 85: *** ***Vibudhah sahitaah sarve yatah puccham tatah krutaah |*** ***Krishnena vaasukeh daityaah poorva kaaye niveshitaah ||*** The Lord *Sarveshvara * is told as *Krishna * here. *Krishna * made all the *asuraas * stand towards the head portion of *Vaasuki*, and all the *devaas * were made to hold the tail portion of *Vaasuki*. 



 [[336]] In *Bhagavata * it is said that when *Krishna * told the *daanavaas * to hold the tail, they thought it was below their prestige to hold the tail; they said that they will hold the head part of *Vaasuki*. But here it is not told so. *Bhagavaan * saw to it that the *daanavaas * were located towards the head portion of *Vaasuki * serpent. 





## 86
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 86:  *** ***Te tasya mukha nihsvaasa vanhinaa apahatatvishah |*** ***Nistejaso asuraah sarve babhoovuh amitoujasah ||*** All the *asuraas * were extremely exhausted, they lost all their strength and vigour, because of being hit by the breath of *Vaasuki*, the fire which was coming out of the mouth of *Vaasuki*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Ta iti | Amitoujasah tasya iti anvayah |*** *Amitoujasah * is an adjective to *Vaasuki*, the serpent. 





## 87
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 87: *** ***Tenaiva mukha nihsvaasa vaayunaasta balaahakaih |*** ***Puccha pradeshe varshadbhih tathaa cha aapyaayitaah suraah ||*** The *devaas * were located at the tail end of *Vaasuki*; there were lot of clouds blown by the breath of *Vaasuki*, and these clouds moved towards the tail, and started to rain cool waters on the *devataas*; they were never feeling tired. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[337]] ***Tena eva iti | Vanhinaastam balaahakaih iti paathe, pucche vanhinaa   
astam samksheenam iti arthah | Balaahakaih bhagavataa srushteh |*** There are two *paathaas, vaayunaa asta balaahakaih * and *vanhinaa asta **balaahakaih. Balaahaka * means cloud. Clouds moved towards the tail, and at the tail, it rained. Clouds emptied everything that they had. If a question arises as to how the clouds came there, it was because of *Bhagavaan * only. He created clouds which moved due to the powerful breath of *Vaasuki*, which came towards the tail and poured cool waters on the *devaas * and created a pleasant environment there; they got more and more energy to do the churning. 





## 88
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 88: *** ***Ksheeroda madhye bhagavaan koorma roopi svayam harih |*** ***Manthanaadreh adhisthaanam bhramato abhoot mahaa mune ||*** *Koorma avataara * is mentioned in just one *shloka. Bhagavaan * Himself incarnated as the great *Koorma*, tortoise, in the middle of the *Ksheera **Saagara*. O great sage, *Maitreya*, He became the support for the *Mandara **parvata*, which was being used as the *manthaana*, churning, which was continuously revolving due to the churning. 





## 89
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 89: *** ***Roopena anyena devaanaam madhye chakra gadaadharah |*** ***Chakarsha naagaraajaanam daitya madhye aparena cha ||*** *Bhagavaan*, who was holding the *chakra, gadaa*, took two forms, one form along with the *devaas*, as though another *deva*, and another form, and went in between the *asuraas*, and joined them. He also started moving the *Naagaraaja, Vaasuki*, king of the serpents. 



 [[338]] He incarnated as the *Koorma*, took a form along with *devaas*, and another form along with the *asuraas*. 





## 90
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 90: *** ***Uparyaakraantavaan shailam bruhat roopena keshavah |*** ***Tathaa aparena maitreya yat na drushtam sura asuraih ||*** Not only this, He took one more form, a mighty huge form, He occupied the top portion of the *Mandara Parvata*, and this form was not seen by the gods or the *asuraas*. 





## 91
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 91: *** ***Tejasaa naagaraajaanam tathaa aapyaayitavaan harih |*** ***Anyena tejasaa devaan upabruhmitavaan prabhuh ||*** He started to give lot of energy to *Vaasuki*, king of serpents; also the gods, He pumped them with energy so that they had all the strength and vigour to do the churning with great speed. 





## 92
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 92: *** ***Mathyamaane tatah tasmin ksheera abdhou deva daanavaih |*** ***Havirdhaamaa abhavat poorvam surabhih sura poojitaa ||*** When it was being churned in *Ksheera Abdhi*, by the *devaas * and *asuraas*, the *Kaamadhenu * cow came out of the ocean, which was worshipped by all the gods. First the *Surabhi * came, which is said to be *Havirdhaamaa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Mathyamaana iti | Havirdhaam havisha aashrayah |***  [[339]] All the *yajnya saamagris, havis * and others used for *yajnya, Surabhi * is said to be the storehouse of all this *havis*. 





## 93
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 93: *** ***Jagmuh mudam tadaa devaah daanavaah cha mahaa mune |*** ***Vyaakshipta chetasah cha eva babhoovuh sthimitekshanaah ||*** The *devaas * and *danavaas * were highly pleased, overjoyed. Also, they were disturbed by what is happening here, they could not understand. When *Surabhi * came, their eyes were totally locked on this, about what is happening. 





## 94
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 94: *** ***Kim etat iti siddhaanaam divi chintayataam tatah |*** ***Babhoova vaarunee devee madaaghoornita lochanaa ||*** The *siddhaas * were all thinking "What is this, what is happening?" *Vaaruni **Devi * came out next, and her eyes were rolling with intoxication. 





## 95
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 95: *** ***Krutaavartaat tatah tasmaat ksheerodaat vaasayan jagat |*** ***Gandhena paarijaato abhoot deva stree nandanah taruh ||*** Next came the *Paarijaata * tree, from the whirlpool which was formed due to the churning, in the *Ksheera Saagara*. The *Paarijaata * tree which gives joy to all the *deva strees*, the women folk of the gods, spreading its fragrance in the entire world, came next. 





## 96
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 96: ***  [[340]] ***Roopa oudaarya gunopetah tathaa cha apsarasaam ganah |*** ***Ksheerodadheh samutpanno maitreya parama adbhutah ||*** The most wonderful host of *apsaras*, endowed with supreme beauty, and endowed with qualities, came next, O *Maitreya*. It was most wonderful. 





## 97
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 97: *** ***Tatah sheetaamshuh abhavat jagruhe tam maheshvarah |*** ***Jagruhuh cha visham naagaah ksheerodaabdhi samutthitam ||*** Then the moon came, and immediately, it was taken by *Maheshvara*. Then the poison came from the *Ksheera Saagara*, which the serpents took. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Aadou bhagavan manaso jaatasya chandrasya dvou dehou |   
Tatra eko abdhijah shiva shiro bhooshanam; anyastu atrinetrajo loka   
yaatraa niyuktah | Naagaah cha iti cha shabdaat maheshvaro api   
visham jagraaha |*** The moon which was created by the mind of *Bhagavaan * had two forms. One of them was born out of the *Ksheera Saagara*, it became an ornament in *Shiva's * head, and another is the moon we see, which was born through the eyes of *Atri*, it is meant for the *loka yaatre*. It is well known that *Maheshvara * took the poison, and is called *Neelakantha * after that. The word *cha * indicates that *Maheshvara * also took part of the poison. 





## 98
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 98: *** ***Tato dhanvantirih devah shvetaambara dharah svayam |*** ***Vibhrat kamandalum poornam amrutasya samuttitah ||***  [[341]] Holding the *kumbha * filled with *amruta*, God *Dhanvantari * who was wearing white clothes, He Himself came out of the *Ksheera Samudra*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Amrutasya poornam iti triteeyaarthe shashti |*** 





## 99
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 99: *** ***Tatah svastha manaskaah te sarve daiteya daanavaah |*** ***Babhoovuh muditaah sadyo \(sarve\) maitreya munibhih saha ||*** O *Maitreya*, at that time, when they saw *Dhanvantari Bhagavaan * come out of the *Ksheera Abdhi*, holding the pot of *Amruta*, they were all pleased in their minds. The *rishis * and *munis * were highly pleased. 





## 100
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 100: *** ***Tatah sphurat kaantimateem vikaasi kamale sthitaa |*** ***Shreeh devee payasah tasmaat udbhootaa ghruta pankajaa ||*** And then, *Shridevi * came out of that, radiating brilliance, sitting on a full bloomed lotus, was also holding a lotus in Her hands. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Drava roopam ekam dravyam amrutam jaatam, anyat   
somaatmakam |*** *Amruta * is in two forms - one is in liquid form, the other was present as *soma*. From *soma lataa*, they extract *soma*. 





## 101
 [[342]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 101: *** ***Taam tushtuvuh mudaa yuktaah shree sooktena maharshayah ||*** All the *rishis*, being overjoyed, eulogized Here with *Sri Sookta*. 





## 102
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 102: *** ***Vishvaa vasuh mukhaah tasyaa gandharvaah purato jaguh |*** ***Ghrutaachee pramukhaah tatra nanurtuh cha apsaro ganaah ||*** All the *gandharvaas * led by *Vishvaavasu*, came in front of Her and started to sing. The host of *apsaras * led by *Ghrutaachee*, were dancing in front of Her with joy. 





## 103
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 103: *** ***Gangaadyaah saritah toyaih snaartham upatasthire |*** ***Diggajaa hema patrastham aadaaya vimalam jalam |*** ***Snaapayaanchakrire deveem sarva loka maheshvareem ||*** *Ganga * and all the holy rivers, brought all their waters in order to do *abhisheka * for *Shridevi*. All the *diggajaas * brought pure waters, in golden pots, and did *abhisheka * to the Supreme Lordess, *Sarva Loka Maheshvari, **Shridevi*. 



This is also told by *Swami Deshikan * in *Shri Stuti*. That *gajendras * did *abhisheka * with *kanaka kalasha*. 





## 104
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 104: *** ***Ksheerodo roopadhrittasyai maalaam amlaana pankajaam |***  [[343]] ***Dadou vibhooshanaani ange vishvakarmaa chakaara ha ||*** *Ksheera Saagara*, itself took on a form, and brought out a garland, which was having lotus which will never fade. *Vishvakarma * came and decorated Her with all wonderful ornaments. 





## 105
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 105: *** ***Divya maalyaambaradharaa snaataa bhooshana bhooshitaa |*** ***Pashyataam sarva devaanaam yayou vakshasthalam hareh ||*** *Shridevi * was decorated with wonderful ornaments, and *abhisheka * was done to Her. She was wearing the divine garland, clothes, and all the wonderful ornaments. After having taken the *abhisheka*, and wearing all the wonderful ornaments, when all the *devaas * were beholding that wonderful sight, She went and occupied the *vakshasthala * of *Srihari*. 





## 106
The most wonderful *kataaksha * of *Shridevi * is told here. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 106: *** ***Tayaa vilokitaa devaa hari vakshasthalastha yaa |*** ***Lakshmyaa maitreya sahasaa paraam nirvrutim aagataah ||*** *Shridevi * who had taken resort in the *vaksha sthala * of *Hari*, She saw all the *devaas*. Being glanced by Her, O *Maitreya*, immediately they attained great joy because of the *kataaksha * of *Shridevi*. 





## 107
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 107: *** ***Udvegam paramam jagmuh daityaa vishnu paraanmukhaah |*** ***Tyaktaa lakshmyaa mahaabhaaga viprachitti purogamaah ||***  [[344]] All the *daityaas * starting with *viprachitti*, they also turned away from *Vishnu*, and *Shridevi * did not set Her glances on them, they were highly agitated. 





## 108
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 108: *** ***Tatah te jagruhuh daityaa dhanvantari kara sthitam |*** ***Kamandalum mahaa veeryaah yatra aaste amrutam uttamam ||*** Immediately, with lot of strength, they snatched the *amruta kalasha*, the *kamandalu * which was filled with *amruta * from *Dhanvantari's * hands. 





## 109
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 109: *** ***Maayayaa mohayitvaa taan vishnuh stree roopa samsthitah |*** ***Daanavebhyah tat aadaaya devabhyah pradadou prabhuh ||*** *Bhagavaan * immediately took the most wonderful form of a woman, and attracted all of them, they were subjected to delusion, and He took away the *amruta kalasha * from the *daanavaas*, and gave it to all the *devaas*. 





## 110
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 110: *** ***Tatah papuh suraganaah shakra aadyaah tat tadaa amrutam |*** ***Udyata aayudha nistrimshaa daityaah taam cha samabhyayuh ||*** At that time, the *devaas*, starting with Indra and others, took that *amruta * and drank the wonderful nectar of immortality. At that time, the *daityaas * attacked them, carrying all the weapons, swords. 





## 111
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 111:  *** ***Peete amrute cha balibhih devaih daitya chamooh tadaa |***  [[345]] ***Vadhyamaanaa disho bheje paataalam cha vivesha ha ||*** At that time the *devaas * had already drunk the *amruta*, and had great strength because of drinking the *amruta*, and became very powerful. And started to destroy the entire army of *daityaas * who ran helter skelter in all directions, and also went into *paataala*, the subterranean worlds. 





## 112
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 112: *** ***Tato devaa mudaa yuktaah shanka chakra gadaa aabhrutam |*** ***Pranipatya yathaa apoorvam ashaasamstat trivishtapam ||*** The *devaas * all bowed down to *Mahaa Vishnu*, who was bearing the *shanka, **chakra, gadaa*, His wonderful divine weapons. Being overjoyed the *devaas * again bowed down to Him and did *mangalaashaasanam*. 





## 113
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 113: *** ***Tatah prasannabhaah sooryah prayayou svena vartmanaa |*** ***Jyotimshi cha yathaa maargam prayayuh munisattama ||*** Once the *amruta * was drunk by all the *devaas*, they started to get their strength back, and the whole world pleased, and everything started to fall in place. The Sun was glowing with pleasant brightness, and he started to function as per *dakshinaayana, uttaraayana*, without any change. The stars also started moving not going here and there in wrong directions; they started to function in their respective orbits in a proper manner. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Svena vartmanaa ayanaadi vyatyaasam vinaa | Yathaa   
maargam vakraati chaara varjjam |*** Without any difference in the *ayanaas. *  [[346]] 





## 114
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 114: *** ***Jajvaala bhagavan cha ucchaih chaaru deeptih vibhaavasuh |*** ***Dharme cha sarva bhootaanaam tadaa matih ajaayata ||*** Agni started to glow with great flame, with most wonderful radiance. The minds of ell the beings became focussed on dharma, with great interest. 





## 115
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 115: *** ***Trailokyam cha shriyaa jushtam babhoova dvija sattama |*** ***Shakrascha tridasha shreshthah punah shreemaan ajaayata ||*** All the three worlds were again happy, and overjoyed, with the prosperity and glory. The lord of the *devaas, Indra*, again got back all his glory. 





## 116
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 116: *** ***Simhaasanagatah shakrah sampraapya tridivam punah |*** ***Devaraajye sthito deveem tushtaava aabja karaam tatah ||*** He went back to his place in *svarga*, and sat on his *simhaasana*. Having sat in his throne in the *svarga loka*, he started to eulogize *Shridevi * who was holding a lotus in Her hand. 





## 117
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 117: *** ***Indra uvaacha - *** ***Namaami sarva lokaanaam jananeem abdhi sambhavaam |*** ***Shriyam unnidra padmaaksheem vishnu vakshasthala sthitaam ||***  [[347]] *Indra * said - I bow down, do *namaskaara * to the Mother of all the worlds, One who has incarnated from the *Ksheera Abdhi, Shridevi*, who has Her eyes like a full blown lotus, who has taken resort in the *vaksha sthala * of *Mahaa **Vishnu*. 





## 118
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 118: *** ***Padmaalayaam padma karaam padma patra nibhekshanaam |*** ***Vande padma mukheem deveem padmanaabha priyaam aham ||*** Who has the lotus as Her resting place, who holds the lotus in Her hands, Her glances are like the petals of a lotus, whose face is also like a lotus, consort of *Padmanaabha*, I bow down to Her. 





## 119
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 119: *** ***Tvam siddhih tvam svadhaa svaahaa sudhaa tvam loka paavanee |*** ***Sandhyaa raatrih prabhaa bhootih medhaa shraddhaa sarasvatee ||*** You are only *Siddhi*, You are only *Svadhaa*, You are only *Svaahaa*, You are only *Sudhaa*, You are the one who sanctifies the entire world, You are *Sandhyaa*, You are *Raatri*, You are *Prabhaa, Bhooti, Medhaa, Shraddhaa, **Sarasvati*. All these are Your glories only. 





## 120
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 120: *** ***Yajnya vidyaa mahaa vidyaa guhya vidyaa cha shobhane |*** ***Aatma vidyaa cha devee tvam vimukti phala daayinee ||*** You are *Yajnya vidyaa*, You are *Mahaa vidyaa*, You are *Guha vidyaa*. You are only the one who is worshipped by all these things. You give all kinds of fruits, *dharma, artha, kaama, moksha*. You also give the fruit of *moksha*. 



 [[348]] *Aatma vidyaa cha devee tvam * is quoted in many commentaries. *Shridevi * is also told to be the bestower of fruits of *upaasanaa*. She is also to be meditated upon in the *upaasanaa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yajnya iti | Yajnya vidyaa dharma meemaamsaa, mahaa vidyaa   
indrajaala aadi kuhaka jnyaanam | Guha vidyaa mantra vaada   
visheshah |*** *Yajnya vidyaa * is *dharma meemaamsaa*, the *poorva kaanda * of *Vedaas. Mahaa **vidyaa * is knowledge to cheat others like *indrajaala*, etc. *Guhya **vidyaa * is *mantra vaada*, etc. 





## 121
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 121: *** ***Aanveekshikee trayee vaartaa danda neetih tvam eva cha |*** ***Soumya asoumyaih jagat roopaih tvayaa etat devi pooritam ||*** *Tarka shaastra, artha shaastra*, the *Vedaas, vaanijya, pashu paalya, artha **shaastra *- all these are You only. All the forms seen here - pleasant and unpleasant are filled by You only. All forms are You only. 



This is also telling about the all pervasiveness of *Shridevi*. 





## 122
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 122: *** ***Kaa tu anyaa tvaamrute devi sarva yajnya mayam vapuh |*** ***Adhyaaste deva devasya yogi chintyam gadaabhrutah ||*** The holder of the wonderful divine mace, *Bhagavaan*, His *divya mangala **vigraha * is said to be *yajnya maya*. You have gone and taken resort in  [[349]] that *divya mangala vigraha*. Who else can take resort in that kind of form of *Bhagavaan*, who is meditated upon only by yogis? 





## 123
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 123: *** ***Tvayaa devi parityaktam sakalam bhuvanatrayam |*** ***Vinashta praayam abhavat tvayaa idaaneem samedhitam ||*** When You had left the three worlds, these three worlds were without *Shri * at that time, everything was as though completely destroyed. Now that You have again incarnated and come back, everything has regained back its glory. 



*Parityakta * means that the world had lost its glory, it was just *tirodhaana*. 





## 124
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 124: *** ***Daaraah putraah tathaa aagaara suhrut dhaanya dhanaadikam |*** ***Bhavati etat mahaa bhaage nityam tvat veekshanaat nrunaam ||*** All the wives, children, houses, friends, *dhaanya*, wealth - all of these they will attain through your *kataaksha*, if You just cast Your glance on all the people. 





## 125
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 125: *** ***Shareera aarogyam aishvaryam ari pakshah kshayah sukham |*** ***Devi tvat drushti drushtaanaam purushaanaam na durlabham ||*** *Shareera*, health, wealth, destruction of all the enemies, all happiness, whoever comes under Your glances, for them it is very easy, not at all unattainable.  [[350]] 





## 126
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 126: *** ***Tvam maataa sarva lokaanaam deva devo harih pitaa |*** ***Tvayaa etat vishnunaa cha ambaa jagat vyaaptam chara acharam ||*** You are the mother of all the worlds. *Hari * who is the Lord of all the gods, is like the father. O Mother, by You, and *Vishnu * both, the entire world of movables and immovables is pervaded. 





## 127
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 127: *** ***Maa nah kosham tathaa goshtham maa gruham maa paricchadam |*** ***Maa shareeram kalatram cha tyajethaah sarva paavanee ||*** Reservoir of all the wealth, the *go-shaalaa*, house, and the supporting paraphernalia, please do not desert us any more. 





## 128
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 128: *** ***Maa putraan maa suhrut vargam maa pashoon maa vibhooshanam |*** ***Tyajethaa mama devasya vishnoh vakshasthalaalaye ||*** O *Mahaalakshmi * who has taken resort in the *vakshasthala * of Vishnu, let not my children, my host of friends, of *pashus, vibhooshana*, please do not desert us any more. Let us be endowed with all this prosperity and glory. 





## 129
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 129: *** ***Sattvena shoucha satyaabhyaam tathaa sheelaadibhih gunaih |*** ***Tyajyante te naraah sadyah santyaktaa ye tvayaa amale ||***  [[351]] O blemishless *Mahaalakshmi*, those who are deserted by You, immediately what happens to them? They will not have *sattva guna*, or *shoucha **\(shaastreeya shuddhi\), * or *satya*, or *sheela * and other qualities. 





## 130
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 130: *** ***Tvayaa avalokitaah sadyah sheeladyaih akhilaih gunaih |*** ***Dhanaih aishwaryaih cha yujyante purushaa nirgunaa api ||*** While those who have come under Your *kataaksha*, Your auspicious glances, even if they are without any qualities, what will happen to them? Immediately, they will attain all qualities, they will get wealth, and they will attain everything. 





## 131
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 131: *** ***Sa slaaghyah sa gunee dhanyah sa kuleenah sa buddhimaan |*** ***Sa shoorah sa cha vikraanto yam tvam devi nireekshase ||*** Whomever You see, he is the one who is to be honoured, he is the one who will have all good qualities, he the one who feels that he has attained everything, he is the one who is born in higher clan, he becomes the intelligent one, he will be valorous, he will cross over any hurdle, all these will happen to one on whom You show Your *kataaksha*. 



This is an often quoted *pramaana * in various *rahasya granthaas*. 





## 132
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 132: *** ***Sadyo vaigunyam aayaanti sheelaadyaah sakalaa gunaah |*** ***Paraanmukhee jagaddhaatree yasya tvam vishnu vallabhe ||***  [[352]] At the same time, One who supports the entire world, if you turn away from someone, he will lose all his good qualities immediately. 





## 133
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 133: *** ***Na te varnayitum shaktaa gunaan jihvaa api vedhasah |*** ***Praseeda devi padmaakshi maa smaanstyaaksheeh kadaachana ||*** O *Mahaalakshmi*, be pleased with us, please do not desert us anymore anytime. Even *Chaturmukha Brahma * cannot eulogize You completely; he cannot praise You with all Your qualities. 



Indra praises *Mahaalakshmi * wonderfully and tells the greatness of *Lakshmi **kataaksha*, what all it can do to one. And if one is not subjected to *Mahaalakshmi's kataaksha*, what all they will lose. 





## 134
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 134: *** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Evam shreeh samstutaa samyak praaha drushyaa shatakratum |*** ***Pashyataam sarva devaanaam sarva bhootasthitaa dvija ||*** *Sri Paraasharar * said - Thus being eulogized wonderfully by *Indra*, She was present in Her most wonderful form. She told *Indra * thus, when all the gods were seeing, O *Maitreya*. 





## 135
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 135: *** ***Shreeh uvaacha -*** ***Paritushto asmi devesha stotrena anena te hare |*** ***Varam vruneeshva yah tvishto varadaaham tavaagataa ||***  [[353]] Now I have come in front of you. I give any boons that you want. Seek any boon that you want, I am very pleased with your *stotra*. 



***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying *Amsha * 1, Chapter 9, the wonderful way in which Indra extolled the greatness of *Mahaalakshmi*, eulogized *Shridevi * who incarnated in the *Ksheera Samudra*, and also about *Shridevi's kataaksha*, which has such wonderful powers. All the *devaas * who were graced by Her *kataaksha * had all glory, and the *asuraas * who were denied of that were suffering. 





## 134
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 134: *** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Evam shreeh samstutaa samyak praaha drushyaa shatakratum |*** ***Pashyataam sarva devaanaam sarva bhootasthitaa dvija ||*** *Sri Paraasharar * said - When all the gods were seeing, *Shridevi * who is present in all beings, being praised by *Indra * like this, She told *Indra * thus. 





## 135
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 135: *** ***Shreeh uvaacha -*** ***Paritushtaa asmi devesha stotrena anena te hare |*** ***Varam vruneeshva yah tvishto varadaaham tavaagataa ||*** I, One who gives boons, have come now in front of you; now I am extremely pleased with your *stotraas*; you ask for any boon which you like, now that I have come and I give any boon that you seek. 





## 136
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 136: ***  [[354]] ***Indra uvaacha -*** ***Varadaa yadi me devi vara arho yadi cha api aham |*** ***Trailokyam na tvayaa tyaajyam esha me astu varah parah ||*** *Indra * said - If You are willing to give me any boon, if I deserve any boon from You, the boon that I seek is that You should not leave the three worlds again. 





## 137
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 137: *** ***Stotrena yah tathaa etena tvaam stoshyati abdhi sambhave |*** ***Sa tvayaa na parityaajyo dviteeyo astu varo mama ||*** O *Mahaalakshmi * who manifested from the *Ksheera Abdhi*, one who prays to You with this *stotra * which I have prayed now \( *Indra Stuti * to *Mahaalakshmi*\), You should never leave such a person. 





## 138
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 138: *** ***Shreeh uvaacha - *** ***Trailokyam tridasha sreshtha na santyakshyaami vaasava |*** ***Datto varo mayaa ayam te stotra aaraadhana tushtayaa ||*** *Shri * said - Being very pleased with your *stotraas*, now I have given you this boon. O excellent among the *devaas*. I am not going to leave these three worlds, these three worlds will always be having prosperity and glory; I am not going to desert them any more. 





## 139
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 139: *** ***Yah cha saayam tathaa praatah stotrena anena maanavah |*** ***Maam stoshyati na tasya aham bhavishyaami paraanmukhee ||***  [[355]] I will never turn away from one who prays to Me with this *stotra*, mornings and evenings, every day; whoever prays to Me and makes Me pleased with this *stotra*, I will never turn away from him. 





## 140
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 140: *** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Evam dadou varou devee devaraajaaya vai puraa |*** ***Maitreya shreeh mahaa bhaagaa stotra aaraadhana toshitaa ||*** *Sri Paraashara *- Thus, *Shridevi * gave Indra two boons, O *Maitreya*, being very pleased by his worship with the *stotraas*. 





## 141
Now, *Paraasharar * tells about the nature of Her manifestations. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 141: *** ***Bhrugoh khyaatyaam samutpannaa shreeh poorvam udadheh punah |*** ***Deva daanava yatnena prasootaa amruta manthane ||*** Initially She was born of *Bhrugu * in *Khyaati*, and again She manifested in the *Ksheera Abdhi*, during the churning of the ocean, for *amruta * which was done by *devaas * and *daanavaas*. 





## 142
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 142: *** ***Evam yadaa jagat svamee deva devo janaardanah |*** ***Avataaram karoti eshaa tadaa shreeh tat sahaayinee ||*** Whenever *Devadeva*, who is the Supreme of the Lords, the Master of the all the worlds, *Janaardana*, manifests, *Shri * also manifests along with Him. 



 [[356]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Evam iti | Tat sahaayinee tena saha ayate gacchati iti tat sahaayinee,   
tat sahachaarinee iti arthah |*** One who goes with Him, She is always inseparably associated with Him, She always manifests along with Him, is the meaning. 





## 143
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 143: *** ***Punascha \(padmaat utpannaa\) padmaa sambhootaa hi aadityo abhoot   
yadaa harih |*** ***Yadaa cha bhaargavo raamah tadaa abhoot harinee tu iyam ||*** Again, when He incarnated as *Aaditya*, \(the twelfth son of *Aditi*, the *Vaamana Avataara\), Shri * manifested as *Padmaa*. When He manifested as *Bhaargava Raama, Parashuraama*, She manifested as *Harini*. 





## 144
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 144: *** ***Raaghavatve abhavat seetaa rukmanee krishna janmani |*** ***Anyeshu cha avataareshu vishnoh eshaa anapaayinee ||*** When *Bhagavaan * incarnated as *Sriraama*, She became *Seeta*. And, in His incarnation as *Krishna*, She manifested as *Rukmini*. In whatever *avataaraas **Vishnu * is seen, She is always inseparably associated with Him. 





## 145
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 145: *** ***Devatve deva dehaa iyam manushyatve cha maanushee |*** ***Vishnoh deha anuroopaam vai karoti eshaa aatmanah tanum ||*** Whenever He takes the form of a *deva*, She also takes the form of a *devataa*. Whenever He takes the form of a human, She also takes a human  [[357]] form. Whatever form He takes in whichever class, accordingly She also manifests taking on a similar form. 





## 146
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 146: *** ***Yah cha etat shrunuyaat janma lakshmyaa yah cha pathet narah |*** ***Shriyo na vichyutih tasya gruhe yaavat kula trayam ||*** The purpose of *Paraasharar * teaching all these to Maitreya, is that it is going to be extremely beneficial for anyone who recites all these things. To this day, it brings all good to one who recites this. This *avataara * of *Lakshmi*, whoever listens to this, or whoever reads this, *Shridevi * will never desert him, and he will always be having all kinds of glory and prosperity. 





## 147
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 147: *** ***Pathyate yeshu cha eva eshaa gruheshu shree kathaa mune |*** ***Alakshmee kalahaadhaaraa na teshu aaste kadaachana ||*** In whichever house this story of *Shridevi's * manifestations is being read, *Alakshmi * who is the cause of all kinds of quarrel, will never find a place, will never be present in that house. 



This is the greatness of the manifestation of *Shridevi*. 





## 148
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 148: *** ***Etat te kathitam sarvam yat maam tvam pariprucchasi |*** ***Ksheeraabdhou shreeh yathaa jaataa poorvam bhrugu sutaa satee ||*** As you requested me to tell, I have recited to you as it is, all of them - being the daughter of *Bhrugu * earlier, how She manifested in the *Ksheera Abdhi*.  [[358]] 





## 149
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 9, Shloka 149: *** ***Iti sakala vibhooti avaapti hetuh stutih iyam indra mukhodgaataa hi   
laskmyaah |*** ***Anudinam iha pathyate nrubhih yaih vasati na teshu kadaachit api   
alakshmeeh ||*** This *Lakshmi Stuti*, which has come from *Indra*, is the cause of one attaining all kinds of glory. Whoever reads this everyday, *Lakshmi * will never desert them. 



This is the *phala * of the recitation. Most of the *puraana kathaas * have a *phala * in the end. This is why these *puraanaas * are recited, and people sit and listen to them. People do *paaraayanam * also. Because it brings in immense glories and all good. 



Thus the Ninth Chapter comes to an end. 



***|| Iti Shri Vishnu Puraane Prathame Amshe Navamo Adhyaayah ||*** 



***|| Iti Shri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Prathame   
Amshe Navamo Adhyaayah ||*** 



***|| Atha Dashamo Adhyaayah ||*** 
