+++
title = "10"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 1:*** ***Maitreyah -*** ***Kathitam me tvayaa sarvam yat prushto asi mayaa mune |***  [[359]] ***Bhrugu sargaat prabhruti esha sargo me kathyataam punah ||*** *Maitreya* said - O *Paraashara*, whatever I have asked, you have told me. Starting with *Bhrugu sarga*, I would like to listen about creation in more detail. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Atha sankshepena shrutam bhrugu sargam vistaratah shrotum prucchati   
kathitam iti |*** Whatever was told earlier briefly about *Bhrugu sarga*, the creation of *Bhrugu vamsha*, now *Maitreyar* wants to listen to it in more detail. So, he is requesting *Paraasharar* to tell him about that. 





## 2
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 2:*** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Bhrugoh khyaatyaam samutpannaa lakshmeeh vishnu parigrahah |*** ***Yathaa dhaatru vidhaataarou khyaatyaam jaatou sutou bhrugoh ||*** *Sri Paraashara - Lakshmi* who was born to *Khyaati* of *Bhrugu*, She became *Vishnu's* consort. *Bhrugu* also had two sons of *Khyaati, **Dhaatru* and *Vidhaatru*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Bhrugoh iti | Parigrahah kalatram |*** 





## 3
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 3:*** ***Aayatih niyatih cha eva meroh kanye mahaatmanah |*** ***Bhaarye dhaatru vidhaatroh te tayoh jaatou sutou ubhou ||***  [[360]] *Aayati* and *Niyati* were two daughters of *Meru*, they became *Dhaatru* and *Vidhaatru's* wives. From them, two sons were born. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Aayatih iti | Tayoh aayati nityayoh, sutou ubhou jaatou |*** 





## 4
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 4:*** ***Praanah cha eva mrukanduh cha maarkandeyo mrukandutah |*** ***Tato vidashiraa jajnye praanasya api sutam shrunu ||*** They were called *Praana* and *Mrukandu. Mrukandu* had a son called *Maarkandeya. Praana* had a son by name *Veda Shiras*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Taavevaah praanascha iti | Praano mrukundah cha | Tatra mrukunduto   
jajnya iti anvayah | Tayoh jaatou iti paathah |*** 





## 5
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 5:*** ***Praanasya dyutimaan putro raajavaan cha tato abhavat |*** ***Tato vamsho mahaa bhaaga vistaram bhaargavo gatah ||*** *Praana* had a son by name *Dyutimaan, Dyutimaan* had a son called *Raajavaan*. From then on, the *Bhrugu vamsha* expanded a lot after that. 



Now, *Paraasharar* starts to tell about the daughter. We read about this in Chapter 7, *shloka* 22, about the children of *Daksha. Daksha* had 24 children from *Prasooti. Khyaati, Sati* and *Sambhooti* married *Bhrugu, Rudra \(Bhava*\)  [[361]] and *Mareechi*. Then the *Bhrugu vamsha* was told. *Sati* married *Rudra*, and *Rudra srushti* was told in Chapter 8. Chapter 8, *shloka* 12 tells that *Rudra* takes *Sati* as his wife. *Sati* dies in the *Daksha yaaga*, which was also told, due to *Daksha kopa*; so that *vamsha* did not continue after that. Next one is *Sambhooti* and *Mareechi*. This is told now. 





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 6:*** ***Patnee mareecheh sambhootih pournamaasam asooyata |*** ***Virajaah parvatah cha eva tasya putrou mahaatmanah ||*** *Sambhooti* gave birth to *Pournamaasa* from *Mareechi. Pournamaasa* had two sons, *Virajas* and *Parvata*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Atha krama praaktam mareecheh sambhootyaam jaatam vamsham aaha   
- patnee mareecheh iti | Atra alpa santaano mareecheh putrah   
poornamaasah uktah | Bahu santaanaan kaashyapa vivasvaadeen putra   
poutraadeen asmin amshe vamsha sankeertane aaditya utpatti   
prastaave tureeye amshe soorya vamsha prastaave cha vakshye |*** This is as per the order - *Mareechi* has children in *Sambhooti*. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 7:*** ***Vamsha sankeertane putraan vadishye aham tato dvija |*** ***Smrutih cha angeerasah patnee prasootaa kanyakaah tathaa |*** ***Sineevaalee kuhooh cha eva raakaa cha anumatih tathaa ||*** I am going to talk about this *vamsha sankeertana*, later on \( *Virajas* and *Parvata* are told, and the remaining will be told later in  [[362]] the *Amsha* 4\). *Smruti* became wife of *Angiras*, and she gave birth to four daughters *Sineevaali, Kuhu, Raakaa, Anumati*. 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 8:*** ***Anasooyaa tathaa eva atreh jajnye nishkalmashaan sutaan |*** ***Somam durvaasasam cha eva dattaatreyam cha yoginam ||*** *Anasooya* from *Atri*, gave birth to three children, *Soma *\(the moon\), *Durvaasa* and *Dattaatreya *\(who was a *yogi*\). 





## 9
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 9:*** ***Preetyaam pulastya bhaaryaayaam dattotrih tat suto abhavat |*** ***Poorva janmani yo agastyah smrutah svaayambhuve antare ||*** *Pulastya* from his wife *Preethi*, had a son called *Dattotri. Dattotri* in his earlier *janma* was well known as *Agastya* in the *Svaayambhuva Manvantara*. 



*Agastya* is a position, called *pravaaha nityaas*. There will be one *Agastya* in that position all the time. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Preetyaam iti | Tat sutah tasya pulastyasya ourasah sutah |*** 





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 10:*** ***Kardamah chaarvareevaan cha sahishnuh cha suta trayam |*** ***Kshamaa tu sushuve bhaaryaa pulahasya prajaapateh ||***  [[363]] *Pulaha* from his wife *Kshamaa*, had three sons, *Kardama, Arvareevaan*, and *Sahishnu*. 





## 11
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 11:*** ***Kratoh cha santatih bhaaryaa valaakhilyaa anasooyataa |*** ***Shashtih putra sahasraani muneenaam oordhvaretasaam ||*** *Kratu's* wife was *Santati*, she gave birth to *Vaalakhilyaas. Vaalakhilyaas* are sixty thousand *munis*, sages, who were *akanda brahmachaaris*. 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 12:*** ***Angushta parva maatraanaam jvalat bhaaskara tejasaam |*** ***Oorjaayaam tu vasishtasya saptaa jaayanta vai sutaah ||*** They were of the size of one third of the thumb, but were having extremely great *tejas*, were shining with their knowledge. *Vasishta* from *Oorjaa*, had seven sons. 





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 13:*** ***Rajo gotro oordhvabaahuh cha savanah cha anaghah tathaa |*** ***Sutapaah shukra iti ete sarve saptarshayo amalaah ||*** *Vasistha's* seven sons born of *Oorjaa* were well known as *Saptarshis*, were very pure and without any defect. Their names are *Rajas, Gotra, **Oordhvabaahu, Savana, Anagha, Sutapa, Shukra*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Raja iti | Saptarshaya iti | Ete triteeye manvantare saptarshayo   
vakshyante |***  [[364]] In the third *manvantara*, they were the *saptarshis*. 





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 14:*** ***Yo asaavagnyabhimaanee syaat brahmanah tanayo agrajah |*** ***Tasmaat svaahaa sutaan lebhe treen udaaroujaso dvija ||*** *Brahma's* eldest son, is called *Agnyabhimaani, Agni; Svaaha*, who was his wife gave birth to three sons, who were endowed with good qualities. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sarga prasangaat agni sargam aaha yo asaaviti |*** The *Agni sarga* is going to be told now. 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 15:*** ***Paavakam pavamaanam tu shuchim cha api jalaashinam ||*** Three sons of *Svaaha* from *Agni* are called *Paavaka, Pavamaana* and *Shuchi*. Out of them, *Shuchi* is said to be *jalaashi*, one who eats or drinks water. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Paavakam iti | Yathaa kourme \* Nirmanthyah pavamaanah syaat   
vaidyutah paavakah smrutah | Yah cha asou tapate soorye shuchih   
agnih asou smrutah || iti | Jalaashinam iti shuchi visheshanam |*** Their names have come because of their qualities. This is told in *Koorma **Puraana. Jalaashi* is qualifying *Shuchi*. One who is generated by churning *Arani*, that *Agni* is called *Pavamaana*. The fire which is found in lightning, is called *Paavaka*. The fire burning in the Sun, is called *Shuchi*, he drinks the waters.  [[365]] 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 16:*** ***Teshaam tu santataavanye chatvaarimshah cha pancha cha |*** ***Kathyante vanhayah cha ete pitaa putra trayam cha yat ||*** Each of these three had fifteen children, they became 45 totally. They are all called *Agnis*, who is the eldest son of *Brahma*. Three sons of his, who are also called *Agnis*. Totalling to 49 *Agnis*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Teshaam iti | Pitru putra trayam pitaa putra trayam cha, trayah   
putraah pratyekam pancha dasha putrakaah |*** *Agni*, his sons *Paavaka, Pavamaana* and *Shuchi*, and fifteen children of each. \(1 \+ 3 \+ 45 = 49\) 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 17:*** ***Evam ekona panchaashat vanhayah parikeertitaah ||*** These 49 are called *Agnis*, are well known. 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 18:*** ***Pitaro brahmanaa srushtaa vyaakhyaataa ye mayaa tava |*** ***Agnishvaattaa barhishado anagnayah saagnayah cha ye ||*** *Brahma* created *Pitrus*, which was already told to you, O *Maitreya*. They are of two groups *Agnishvaatta* and *Barhishada. Agnishvaatta* are those who do not have fire, who are not eligible to perform *yajnyaas. Barhishadaas* are with fire, eligible to perform *yajnyaas*. 



 [[366]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Pitara iti | Agnishvaataah ayajvaano, moortaah trayo ganaah |   
Barhishadah yajvaano moorti mantah chatvaarah | Agnishvaatta sutaa   
menaa |*** *Agnishvaatta* are of three groups. *Barhishadaas* are of four groups. 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 19:*** ***Tebhyah svadhaa sute jajnye menaam \(vaitaraneem\) vai dhaarineem   
tathaa |*** ***Te ubhe brahma vaadinyou yoginyou api ubhe dvije |*** *Svadhaa* from these *Pitrus* gave birth to two daughters, *Mena* and *Vaitarini*. Both these, *Mena* and *Vaitarini*, were endowed with *Brahma Jnyaana*, and were *yoginis*. 





## 20
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 20:*** ***Uttama jnyaana sampanne sarvaih samuditaih gunaih ||*** They were endowed with excellent knowledge, and had all good attributes. 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 10, Shloka 21:*** ***Iti ashaa daksha kanyaanaam kathitaa apatyasantatih |*** ***Shraddhaavaan samsmaran etaam anapatyo na jaayate ||*** Thus, the daughters of *Daksha*, was told to you. One who reads this, one who remembers this, with *shraddhaa*, sincerity, will never be without children. 



Thus the Tenth Chapter comes to an end.  [[367]] 



***|| Iti Shri Vishnu Puraane Prathame Amshe Dashamo Adhyaayah ||*** 



***|| Iti Shri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Shri Vishnu Chitteeye Prathame   
Amshe Dashamo Adhyaayah ||*** 



***|| Atha Ekaadasho Adhyaayah ||*** 



In the Eleventh Chapter, the *Dhruva Charita* is going to be told. 


