+++
title = "11"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 1:*** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Priyavrato uttaanapaadou manoh svaayambhuvasya tu |*** ***Dvou putrou su mahaa veeryou dharmajnyou kathitou tava ||*** *Sri Paraashara *- I had told you about two sons, who had great valour, who were always following the path of *dharma*, as two sons of *Svayambhuva **Manu*, called *Priyavrata* and *Uttaanapaada*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Manoh douhitroh vamsha uktah | Atha tat putra anvayam vaktum   
anuvadati priyavrata iti |*** *Manu's* daughter's *vamsha* was told so far. Now *Paraasharar* tells about the *vamsha* of *Manu's* sons. 





## 2
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 2: ***  [[368]] ***Tayoh uttaanapaadasya suruchyaam uttamah sutah |*** ***Abheeshtaayaam abhoot brahman pituh atyanta vallabhah ||*** *Uttaanapaada* had a son by name *Uttama*, who was very dear to him, through *Suruchi*, who was very dear to him. 



*Uttaanapaada* had two wives *Suniti* and *Suruchi*. 





## 3
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 3:*** ***Suneetih naama yaa raajnyah tasya aaseet mahishee dvija |*** ***Sa naati preetimaanstasyaam abhoot yasyaa dhruvah sutah ||*** *Suniti* was the elder wife of the king, he was not liking her that much. From *Suniti*, he had a son by name *Dhruva*. 





## 4
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 4:*** ***Raajaasana sthitasya ankam pituh bhraataram aashritam |*** ***Drushtvaa uttamam dhruvah chakre tam aarodhum manoratham ||*** One day, *Dhruva* comes to see his father sitting on the throne, and on his lap, he sees *Uttama* sitting. He also had a great desire to go and sit on his father's lap. 





## 5
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 5:*** ***Pratyaksham bhoopatih tasyaah suruchyaa na abhyanandyata |*** ***Pranayena aagatam putram utsangaarohanotsukam ||***  [[369]] *Suruchi* was also standing there. In front of her, the son who came with great love and wanted to sit on the lap of his father, *Uttaanapaada* never gave attention to him. 





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 6:*** ***Sa patnee tanayam drushvaa tam ankaarohanotsukam |*** ***Sva putram cha tathaa aaroodham suruchih vaakyam abraveet ||*** *Suruchi* sees the elder wife's son *Dhruva* come there wanting to sit on the lap of *Uttaanapaada*, and also saw his other son *Uttama* sitting on his lap, and told *Dhruva* thus. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 7:*** ***Kriyate kim vruthaa vatsa mahaan esha manorathah |*** ***Anya stree garbha jaatena hi asambhooya mamodare ||*** O son *Dhruva*, why are you trying to do this great effort, and having such a desire to go and sit on the lap of your father. You are born to the other woman, and were never born to me. 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 8:*** ***Uttamottamam apraapyam aviveko abhivaanchasi |*** ***Satyam sutah tvam api asya kim tu na tvam mayaa dhrutah ||*** You are ignorant and do not have the proper knowledge, you are desiring something which is only attained by a great son, you are not one among them. It is true that you are also this king's son only, but you are not born of me. 





## 9
 [[370]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 9:*** ***Etat raajasaasanam sarva bhoobhrut samshrayaketanam |*** ***Yogyam mama eva putrasya kimaatmaa klishyate tvayaa ||*** This throne is the resort of all the great kings. Only my son deserves such a throne. Why are you unnecessarily truing to put effort in futile things? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Etat iti | Poorvoktam uttamatvam aaha sarva iti | Sarva bhoobhrut   
aashraya ketanam iti paathah | Sarva bhoobhrutaam aashrayasha   
saarvabhoumasya ketanam sthaanam |*** 





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 10:*** ***Ucchaih manorathah te ayam mat putrasyeva kim vruthaa |*** ***Suneetyaam aatmano janma kim tvayaa na avagamyate ||*** Your desire to attain this great throne, is wasted, as though it is like my son. Why are you simply desiring for such a great throne? Why don't you remember that you are born of *Suniti* and not of me? How can you deserve such a throne when you are not born of me? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Ucchaih iti | Ucchaih manorathah ucchaasanaabhilaashah |*** 



*Suruchi* thus ridicules the young boy *Dhruva* and *Uttaanapaada* does not say anything. 





## 11
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 11: ***  [[371]] ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Utsrujya pitaram baalah tat shrutvaa maatru bhaashitam |*** ***Jagaama kupito maatuh nijaayaa dvija mandiram ||*** *Dhruva* gets very angry, listening to what *Suruchi* said, and just leaves the place, and goes to his mother *Suniti*. 





## 12
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 12:*** ***Tam drushtvaa kupitam putram eeshat prasphuritaadharam |*** ***Suneetirankam aaropya maitreya idam abhaashata ||*** He was very angry and his lips were quivering. Seeing this, *Suniti* makes him sit on her lap, and tells him thus. 





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 13:*** ***Vatsa kah kopa hetuh te kascha tvaam na abhinandati |*** ***Ko avajaanaati pitaram vatsa yah te aparaadhyati ||*** O son, what is the cause of your anger? Who does not give respect to you? One who does wrong to you will be showing disrespect to the king himself. Who is showing disrespect to the king by doing wrong to you? 





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 14:*** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Ityuktah sakalam maatre kathayaamaasa tat yathaa |*** ***Suruchih praaha bhoopaala pratyaksham ati garvitaa ||***  [[372]] When he was told like this by *Suniti, Dhruva* tells his mother whatever happened. About how *Suruchi* being extremely arrogant, what all she said in front of the king himself. 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 15:*** ***Vinihshvasyeti kathite tasmin putrena durmanaah |*** ***Shvaasa kshaamekshanaa deenaa suneetih vaakyam abhraveet ||*** She was exhausted, when he told her what all *Suruchi* told him in front of the king himself. She tries to console him at that time, and he is extremely angry. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Nishvasyete | Tasmin vruttaante kathite sati shvaasa kshaamekshanaa   
shvaasena dukha janitena kusha drushtih |*** Her eyes were all wet with tears, because of the sorrow after listening to what *Suruchi* did to her son *Dhruva*. She feels very sad and eyes are all wet with tears. 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 16:*** ***Suruchih satyam aahedam manda bhaagyo asi putraka |*** ***Na hi punyavataam vatsa sa patnyaih evam uchyate ||*** O son, what *Suruchi* said is true only. You do not have good fate, you are unfortunate. If you had been fortunate enough, you would not have been told thus by my *sapatni*, who is *Suruchi*. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 17: ***  [[373]] ***Nodvegah taata kartavyah krutam yat bhavataa puraa |*** ***Tat kopa hartum shaknoti daatum kaschaakrutam tvayaa ||*** O *Dhruva*, what *Suruchi* said is true, you are the unfortunate one. If you had been fortunate, you would not have been talked to like this. You do not have to get agitated like this. This is the result of your own deeds only, whatever you have done earlier. If you have done something wrong in your earlier *janma*, the result of that nobody can see. If you have not done something good, you cannot get good because of that. Whatever you have not done, someone cannot give you that. Whatever you have done, someone cannot take it away from you. 



You will reap the benefits according to whatever you have done. If you had done something good, you would have got something good. If you had done something bad, you will face something bad only. 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 18:*** ***Tat tvayaa na atra kartavyam dukham tat vaakya sambhavam ||*** Because of this, you should not feel sad at all, because of what *Suruchi* said. 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 19:*** ***Raajaasanam tathaa chatram varaashvaa vara vaaranaah |*** ***Yasya punyaani tasya ete matvaa etacchaamya putraka ||*** The throne of the king, the white sovereign umbrella, all the elephants and horses, whoever has done a lot of *punya*, only such a person will get all these things. Understanding this, please give up your anger. 





## 20
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 20: ***  [[374]] ***Anya janma krutaih punyaih suruchyaam suruchih nrupah |*** ***Bhaaryaa iti prochyate cha anyaa madvidhaa punya varjitaa ||*** Because *Suruchi* has done *punya* in previous *janma*, king is very dear to her, and always nice to her. Whereas the other one, who is me, who does not have any *punya*, will be simply called as a wife. 





## 21
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 21:*** ***Punya upachaya sampanna tasyaah putrah tathaa uttamah |*** ***Mama putrah tathaa jaatah svalpa punyo dhruvo bhavaan ||*** His son *Uttama* also has done a lot of *punya*. You, who are having very less *punya* are born as my son. 





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 22:*** ***Tathaa api dukham na bhavaan kartum arhasi putraka |*** ***Yasya yaavat sa tena eva svena tushyati buddhimaan ||*** Even then, you should not feel sad because of this. Whatever one deserves, one will get. Whatever one gets, he should be happy with that only. One who is intelligent will understand that whatever one gains is because of some *punya*, whatever one does not gain is because of some *paapa*. Understand this, and be happy with what you get. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 23:*** ***Yadi te dukham atyartham suruchyaa vachasaa abhavat |*** ***Tat punya upachaye yatnam kuru sarva phala prade ||***  [[375]] By listening to *Suruchi's* words, if you felt extremely sad, try to accumulate more *punya*, which will give you all kinds of benefits. Try to engage yourself in performing good deeds. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 24:*** ***Susheelo bhava dharmaatmaa maitrah praani hite ratah |*** ***Nimnam yathaa aapah pravanaah paatram aayaanti sampadam ||*** Become one with good *aachaara*, good conduct, and follow the path of *dharma*. Be friendly with everyone, be good to all beings. Waters which flow down will only be respected by everyone. 



Engage in these kinds of things, and accumulate *punya*. This is the advice *Suniti* gives to *Dhruva. Dhruva* does not listen to this, and goes and does penance, which is a well known story. 



***Recap***: In the previous session, we just started to study the *Dhruva **upaakhyaana*, the story of *Dhruva*. When *Dhruva* feels extremely sad when he could not sit on the lap of his father, while his stepmother *Suruchi's* son *Uttama* sat on the lap, he gets extremely sad and comes to his mother crying, and *Suniti* gives him some wonderful advice, which is essentially the teachings of all *shaastraas*, the *karma siddhaanta*. She tells him 'O my son, please do not get disturbed; if you did not enjoy something, it is because you did not do the right deeds in your previous births earlier. The result what you get today is the result of your own past deeds. If you had done something good, you will enjoy good things. If you had not done something good, you will not get it. You should not worry about it. *Uttama* had done some good deeds in his previous births, so he gets to enjoy the benefits of the kingdom, whereas you had not done such good deeds, and so you are not getting. Whatever little one gets, an intelligent person should feel happy about it. This is what you deserve, based on the deeds done earlier. If everything is based on past deeds, is there no other way? The answer is that it is not so. *Shaastra* tells that it is possible to correct what you do in future. From now onwards, it is in your hands. Till now, whatever you did knowingly or unknowingly is all gone.  [[376]] From this point onwards, it is in your own hands to do the right things. If you do good deeds from now on, you will get to reap good benefits and enjoy good things in future. So, engage in good deeds from now on.' 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 24:*** ***Susheelo bhava dharmaatmaa maitrah praani hite ratah |*** ***Nimnam yathaa aapah pravanaah paatram aayaanti sampadam ||*** Follow good conduct, *sadaachaara*, and follow the path of *dharma*. Be good to all the beings. If you start doing all these, you will definitely get good benefits in future. You have to be always caring for everyone, always follow the path of *dharma*, and not feel proud of yourself; waters when they flow down and form a pond, everyone wants to start using it, and respect that water. 



So, she gives him wonderful advice. *Dhruva* is a *Kshatriya* child. 





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 25:*** ***Dhruva uvaacha -*** ***Amba yat tvam idam praattha prashamaaya vacho mama |*** ***Na etat durvachasaa bhinne hrudaye mama tishthati ||*** *Dhruva* said - O mother, in order to dispel my grief, whatever you said; my heart is completely broken, with the bad words that I have heard from *Suruchi*. Your good words have no place in my heart. 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 26:*** ***So aham tathaa yatishyaami yathaa sarvottamottamam |*** ***Sthaanam praapsyaami asheshaanaam jagataam abhipoojitam ||*** I am going to definitely try for a place; I am going to attain a most supreme position; whatever has to be done to attain such a supreme position, I am going to engage in that. I am going to get that position which is respected by the entire world; I am going to try to attain such an exalted position. 





## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 27:*** ***Suruchirdayitaa raajnyaa tasyaa jaato asmi na udaraat |*** ***Prabhaavam pashya me amba tvam vruddhasya api tava udare ||*** *Suruchi* is beloved of the king. I am not born from her womb. I am not her son. Though I was nurtured in your womb, you are now going to see what is it that I can achieve. You will see my capabilities now. 





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 28:*** ***Uttamah sa mama bhraataa yo garbhena dhrutah tayaa |*** ***Sa raajnyaa aasanam aapnotu pitraa dattam tathaa astu tat ||***  [[377]] My brother *Uttama* who was born of *Suruchi*, let him get the king's throne, which is given by my father to him. Let it be so. I am going to attain the highest position which is respected by the entire world. 





## 29
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 29:*** ***Na anyadattam abheepsyaami sthaanam amba sva karmanaa |*** ***Icchaami tat aham sthaanam yat na praapa pitaa mama ||*** I do not enjoy and accept what is given by others; out of my own efforts, I am going to obtain a place which even my father did not attain. 



He is adamant on putting efforts to go an attain a supreme position which is respected by the entire world. 





## 30
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 30:*** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Nirjagaama gruhaat maatuh iti uktvaa maataram dhruvah |*** ***Puraat cha nirgamya tatah tat baahya upavanam yayou ||*** *Sri Paraasharar* said - He left the mother's place and went out from his mother's house, saying so. He also left the city, and went to a garden outside the city. 





## 31
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 31:*** ***Sa dadarsha muneenstatra sapta poorva aagataan dhruvah |*** ***Krishnaajina uttareeyeshu vishtareshu samaasthitaan |*** There, he sees seven *rishis*, who had already come there ahead of him. They had come there knowing what he is going to do, and to grace him with blessings, they were seated on *krishnaajina*, and *uttareeya*, and *vistara* means *darbhaasana*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sa iti | Poorva gataan poorvameva aatmano anugrahanaartham   
aagataan, krishnaajina uttareeyaani eva vishtaraasteshu |*** Already seven *rishis* had come there in order to bless him, they were seated on the *krishnaajina*. 





## 32
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 32:*** ***Sa raaja putrah taan sarvaan pranipatya abhyabhaashata |*** ***Prashrayaavanatah samyak abhivaadana poorvakam ||*** The prince *Dhruva* bowed down to them in reverence, and spoke thus. He did *abhivaadana* telling his name and *gotra*, and had great respect and reverence to the *rishis*, he bowed down and did *namaskaara*. 





## 33
 [[378]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 33:*** ***Dhruva uvaacha -*** ***Utaanapaada tanayam maam nibodhata sattamaah |*** ***Jaatam suneetyaam nirvedaat ushmaakam praaptam antikam ||*** *Dhruva* said - O holy sages, know me as *Dhruva*, son of *Utaanapaada*, I was born of *Suniti*, and am of extreme sorrow. Out of sorrow, I have come near you; I am approaching you with extreme sorrow. 





## 34
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 34:*** ***Rishayah oochuh -*** ***Chatuh panchaabdha sambhooto baalah tam nrupanandana |*** ***Nirveda kaaranam kinchit tava naadyaapi vartate ||*** The *rishis* said - O prince, you are just four or five years old; you are just a small boy. What can there be which can cause you so much of grief, we do not see any cause for sorrow at all. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Chatur pancheti | Itah praak chaturthe panchame vaa abdhe   
sambhootah |*** You were born four or five years ago. 





## 35
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 35:*** ***Na chintyam bhavatah kinchit dhriyate bhoopatih pitaa |*** ***Na cha eva ishta viyogaadi tava pashyaama baalaka ||*** There is nothing to worry about for you. Your father, who is the king is still living. We do not see that you have lost any beloveds, or close relatives, dear ones, or something which you are liking. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Neti | Chintyam kutumba poshanaadi | Dhriyate jeevati |*** Nothing to worry about such as looking after a family, etc. Your father still lives. 





## 36
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 36:*** ***Shareere na cha te vyaadhih asmaabhih upalakshyate |*** ***Nirvedah kinnimittah te kathyataam yadi vidyate ||*** You do not seem to have any diseases, you look quite healthy. In spite of all these, if you are still having some grief, do tell us the reason for which you are having sorrow. 





## 37
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 37:*** ***Sri Paraasharah - ***  [[379]] ***Tatah sa kathayaamaasa suruchyaa yat udaahrutam |*** ***Tat nishamya tatah prochuh munayah te parasparam ||*** *Sri Paraasharar* said - Then *Dhruva* starts to tell them what all *Suruchi* told him. He was also very angry. From his tone, the *rishis* speak to him thus. 





## 38
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 38:*** ***Aho kshaatram param tejo baalasyaapi yadakshamaa |*** ***Sapatnyaa maatuh uktam yat hrudayaat na apasarpati ||*** Look at this boy's great intolerance, which is the quality of *Kshatriyaas*, the *kshaatra tejas*. Whatever his stepmother told, he is not able to get rid of that thought at all. He is going on thinking about it. Feeling sad, he is not able to forget it. 





## 39
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 39:*** ***Bho bhoh kshatra yadaayaada nirvedaat yat tvayaa adhunaa |*** ***Kartum vyavasitam tat nah kathyataam yado rochate ||*** O son of the king, *Kshatriya's* son, because of your great sorrow, whatever you are about to do, whatever you will engage in, please do tell us. 





## 40
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 40:*** ***Yat cha kaaryam tava asmaabhih saahaayyam anmitadyute |*** ***Tat uchyataam vivakshuh tvam asmaabhih upalakshyase ||*** O *Tejasvi*, do tell us what is that we can do to help you. Do tell us whatever we can do. 





## 41
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 41:*** ***Dhruva uvaacha -*** ***Na aham artham abheepsyaami na raajyam dvija sattamaah |*** ***Tat sthaanam ekam icchami bhuktam na anyena yat puraa ||*** *Dhruva* said - O holy sages, I am not after money or after kingdom. I only want to attain that supreme position which nobody has enjoyed so far before. 





## 42
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 42:*** ***Etat me kriyataam samyak kathyataam praapyate yathaa |*** ***Sthaanam agryam samastebhyah sthaanebhyo munisattamaah ||*** This is what I would seek your help for. Please, do tell me what is that I have to do, in order to attain a place which is superior to everything else. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Etat iti | Yathaa praapyate tathaa katthyataam | Etat kathanam eva   
saahaayyam tat kriyataam |***  [[380]] I do not want you to get me the position itself, just tell me what is it that I have to do to get me this position. That itself is the help that I am seeking from you. 





## 43
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 43:*** ***Mareechih -*** ***Anaaraadhita govindaih naraih sthaanam nrupa aatmaja |*** ***Na hi sampraapyate sreshtham tasmaat aaraadhaya achyutam ||*** Then each sage gives him an advice separately. *Mareechi* said - O son of the king, prince, those who have not worshipped *Govinda*, they cannot attain any excellent position. So, if you want to attain a supreme position, do worship *Govinda*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Bhagavati bhakti atishayaat dhruve kaarunyaat cha sarve api   
prativadanti pranandanti cha anaaraadhite ityaadi saptabhih |*** Why all the seven sages tell independently is because of the extreme devotion they had in *Bhagavaan Govinda*. And also out of great compassion to this small boy, *Dhruva*. 





## 44
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 44:*** ***Atrih -*** ***Parah paraanaam purusho yasya tushto janaardanah |*** ***Sa praapnoti akshayam sthaanam etat satyam mayaa uditam ||*** *Atri* said - That *Janaardana* who is the most supreme person, superior to everyone else; with whom that *Janaardana* is pleased, such a person can only get a position which is permanent. This is the truth that I am telling you. 





## 45
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 45:  *** ***Angiraah -*** ***Yasya antah sarvam eva idam achyutasya avyaya aatmanah |*** ***Tam aaraadhaya govindam sthaanam agryam yadeecchasi ||*** *Angiras* said - All these things are under whose control, controlled by Him, which are all His *shareera*, everything is inside Him, that *Achyuta* who is Supreme Being, immutable, *Paramaatman*, worship that *Govinda* if you desire to attain a foremost position. 





## 46
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 46:*** ***Pulastyah -*** ***Param brahma param dhaama yo asou brahma tathaa param |***  [[381]] ***Tamaaraadhya harim yaati muktim api ati durlabhaam ||*** *Pulastya* said - This Supreme Being, who is the Supreme Brahman, who is the supreme place to be attained by everyone, by worshipping Him, one attains even liberation, which is most difficult to attain by anyone. 





## 47
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 47:*** ***Pulahah -*** ***Aindram indrah param sthaanam yam aaraadhya jagat patim |*** ***Praapa yajnyapatim vishnum tam aaraadhaya suvrata ||*** *Pulaha* said - *Indra*, by worshipping that Supreme Lord of the entire world, the Master of the world, obtained that supreme position, *Indra padavi*, you also please worship that *Vishnu* who is *yajnya pati*, in order to attain such a position. 





## 48
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 48:*** ***Kratuh -*** ***Yo yajnya purusho yajnyo yajnyeshah paramah pumaan |*** ***Tasmin tushthe yat apraapyam kim tat asti janaardane ||*** *Kratu* said - That *yajnya purusha* who Himself is *yajnya*, the one who is the *aaraadhya devataa* of all the *yajnyaas*, the lord of the *yajnyaas*, the Supreme Person, that *Janaardana* if He is pleased, what is there which cannot be attained? If He is pleased one can attain anything; there is nothing which cannot be attained if He is pleased. 





## 49
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 49:*** ***Vasishtah -*** ***Praapnoshi aaraadhite vishnou manasaa yat yat icchasi |*** ***Trailokya antargatam sthaanam kimu vatsa uttamottamam ||*** *Vasistha* said - O son, if you worship Vishnu, whatever you desire in your mind, everything you can attain. Whatever place in all the three worlds, you can attain that. What to say about most excellent among all positions you want to attain? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Praapnoshi iti | Manasaa iti | Itah poorvam aklruptam api dadaati kim   
punah klruptam iti |*** Whatever did not exist earlier also that He can create and give you. What to say of the already existing supreme position? 





## 50
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 50:*** ***Dhruva uvaacha -***  [[382]] ***Aaraadhyah kathito devo bhavadbhih pranatasya me |*** ***Mayaa tat paritoshaaya yat japtavyam tat uchyataam ||*** *Dhruva* said - O holy sages, when I prostrated to you, you have now told me who is the God, deity to be worshipped. Now, in order to please that Vishnu, what is the *japa* that I have to chant? Please do tell me that. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Aaraadhya iti | Mayaa iti | Anupateetasya api aatmano yogyam   
japyam prucchati japtavyam iti |*** Though he was not yet *upaneeta*, not yet done *upanayana*, he asked about the *mantra* which he is eligible to chant. 





## 51
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 51:*** ***Yathaa cha aaraadhanam tasya mayaa kaaryam mahaatmanah |*** ***Prasaada sumukhaah tat me kathayantu maharshayah ||*** How do I worship that Supreme Lord, *Janaardana*, O sages, who are being pleased towards me, please do tell me. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Yathaa iti japaanga prashnah |*** 





## 52
*Rishis* now teach him how to worship the Supreme *Brahman*, and what are the *mantraas* to be chanted, to do the *japa*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 52:*** ***Rishayah oochuh -*** ***Raaja putra yathaa vishnoh aaraadhana paraih naraih |*** ***Kaaryam aaraadhanam tat no yathaavat shrotum arhasi ||*** O prince, please do listen what we are going to say. Those who are desiring to worship *Vishnu*, how should they actually worship *Vishnu*, that we are going to say. As it is, we are going to tell you, please do listen to that. 





## 53
With the next three *shlokaas*, they teach the process of worshipping the Supreme *Brahman, Vishnu*, and also the mantra which has to be chanted. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 53:*** ***Baahyaarthaat akhilaat chittam tyaajayet prathamam narah |*** ***Tasmin eva jagat dhaamni tatah kurveeta nischalam ||*** First, one has to withdraw the mind from all the external sense objects. Mind should be steady, should not wander around here and there. Focussing the mind on only that ultimate refuge or resort of this whole world, and meditating upon that Supreme Being. 



 [[383]] Here they are going to teach *Ashtaanga Yoga*, is what we can understand from the Commentary. ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Chitta ekaagrataa roopo yogo japasya angam iti sa yogam japyam   
upadishanti baahya iti tribhih | Baahyaarthaat iti | Baahyaarthaat   
chittam tyaajayet iti himsaa anruta aadi nishiddha tyaaga roopo   
yamah, sarva vishaya tyaaga roopah pratyaahaarah cha uktah,   
nischalam kurveeta iti aasana praanaayaamou, tat adheenatvaat chitta   
sthairyasya tasmin eva iti shubha aashraye dhaaranaa |*** By these three *shlokaas, rishis* teach *Dhruva* the *Ashtaanga Yoga*, which is an accessory to the *aaraadhana*. The nature of that *yoga* is that it is required in order to attain concentration of mind. in order to do the *japa*, the accessory required is that one has to develop concentration of mind, and then do the *japa*, chanting of the *mantra*. Along with that *Ashtaanga **yoga*, they teach him the *mantra* which is to be chanted. *Ashtaanga **Yoga* has *yama, niyama, aasana, praanaayaama, pratyaahaara, dhaaranaa, **dhyaana, samaadhi*. First, one has to give up all the external objects, giving up of telling lies, giving up doing *himsaa*, this is called *yama*; mind has to be controlled, one should desist from telling lies, and doing *himsaa; himsaa* by all the *tri karanaas. Pratyaahaara* is withdrawing the mind from all external sense objects. Achieving steadiness of the mind is possible through *aasana* and *praanaayaama*. Mind has to be steadily focussed on something. *Aasana* and *praanaayaama* are extremely essential. Focus the mind on the Supreme *Brahman*. Focus the mind on the *divya mangala **vigraha* of *Bhagavaan*, this is the *shubha aashraya*. 



First, withdrawing the mind from everything external, giving up telling lies \( *anruta*\), giving up *himsaa*, withdrawing the mind from all external sense objects, achieving steadiness of the mind, thinking of the *divya mangala **vigraha* of *Paramaatman \(dhaaranaa\)*. 





## 54
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 54:*** ***Evam ekaagra chittena tanmayena dhruta aatmanaa |*** ***Japtavyam yat nibodha etat tannah paarthiva nandana ||*** Having achieved this kind of steady concentrated mind on the *divya mangala **vigraha* of *Paramaatman*, what is the *japa* to be chanted - listen to us, we are going to tell you. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:***  [[384]] ***Evam iti | Dhrutaatmanaa iti | Yathaa arham shouchaadishu   
krutanyeneti niyamah, ekaagra chittena iti dhyaanam, tanmayena iti   
samaadhih, iti ashtaanga yogah uktah |*** The word *evam* indicates that as required for this kind of *ashtaanga yoga. **Shoucha* means *shaastreeya shuddhi, snaana* and others. One should put effort to achieve the *shaastreeya shuddhi*, this is called *niyama*. Focussing the mind on only one object, the *divya mangala vigraha* of the Supreme *Brahman. Tanmaya* means getting completely merged in that object of meditation, this is *samaadhi*. 



How can we say that *rishis* have taught *Ashtaanga Yoga* here? This is explained in the Commentary. After a few *shlokaas, Paraasharar* says in *Shloka* 8 of the next chapter that he is said to be a *yogi*. This indicates that *Ashtaanga Yoga* is what is taught by the *rishis*. 





## 55
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 55:*** ***Hiranya garbha purusha pradhaana avyakta roopine |*** ***Om namo vaasudevaaya shuddha jnyaana svaroopine ||*** This is the *mantra* told with *pranava, Om Namo Vaasudevaaya*. One whose essential nature is pure *jnyaana*, He is present in all these forms, *Hiranya **Garbha, Purusha, Pradhaana, Avyakta*, means that He is *antaryaami*, everything is His *shareera*, being controlled by Him, being supported by Him. Such a *Paramaatman* who is *Vaasudeva*, I bow down and surrender unto Him. His essential nature is like that. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Hiranya iti | \* Hiranyam asya garbho abhoot hiranyasya api garbhajah   
| Tasmaat hiranya garbham tam puraanajnyaah prachakshire | Iti   
bhaarate hiranya garbha shabda niruktyaa hiranmayam brahmaandam   
garbhe yasya sah hiranya garbhah, sa cha atra purushaadi samabhih   
vyaahaaraat kaalaatmaa jnyeyah | Hiranya garbhah vyashtih,   
purushah samashtih iti kechit | Atra dvaadashaakshara mantro   
vivakshitah, laingaadishu dhruvasya tanmaatra upadesha prasiddheh |   
Sa tu rahasya upadeshyatvaat atra yathaa paathe na pathitah |*** The *brahmaanda* is said to be *hiranmaya*, and that *brahmaanda* is in His *garbha*, inside Him, so He is called *Hiranyagarbha*, His womb became *Hiranya*; that *brahmaanda* was born of Him, associated inseparably with Him, He willed. *Viraat* is *brahmaanda, brahmaanda* was created by *Paramaatman*, and then *Chaturmukha Brahma* was created. In *Mahaabhaarata*, the *nirukti* of the word *Hiranyagarbha* is told. He is one in whose womb the *Hiranmaya Brahmaanda* existed. It existed in a state  [[385]] where there was no name and form differentiation, and then He did *naama **roopa vyaakarana* and created all these beings, this is told in the *srushti **prakarana*. Here, *Hiranyagarbha* is told along with the word *Purusha*, the meaning is to be taken as *Paramaatman* who is existing as the *antaraatman* of *kaala; kaala* is also an *upaadaana kaarana* for *srushti*, it is also a *padaartha* in our *siddhaanta*, everything is controlled by *kaala* in this *prakruti mandala*. He is one to whom *kaala* is also a *shareera.* Some people say that *Hiranyagarbha* is *vyashti* and *Purusha* is *samashti. **Samashti* is before the name and form differentiation, *naama roopa **vyaakarana*, before *Chaturmukha Brahma* is created; up to that point, *Paramaatman* directly does the creation, where *prakruti, mahat, **ahamkaara, pancha bhoota tattvaas* are all created. After creating *pancha **bhootaas, Paramaatman* does *pancheekarana*, and then the name and form differentiation happens, from that time, it is called *vyashti srushti*. Before *vyashti srushti, Paramaatman* was Himself existing in those forms, means that He was *antaryaami, mahat shareeraka Paramaatman, **ahamkaara shareeraka Paramaatman*, etc. Here, the *Dvaadashaakshara **Mantra, Om Namo Vaasudevaaya* is meant, but only eight letters are here, *Pranava, Namaha* and *Vaasudevaaya*, because, in *Lainga Puraana*, it is well known that *Dvaadashaakshara* is what *saptarishis* taught *Dhruva*. Because it has to be taught in secrecy, one on one from *Aachaarya* to the *shishya*, in privacy, this is why it is not told here. 





## 56
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 56:*** ***Etat jajaapa bhagavaan japyam svaayambhuvo manuh |*** ***Pitaamahah tava puraa tasya tushto janaardanah ||*** They also justify why this *mantra* can yield such great results. They give an example. They tell *Dhruva* that his grandfather, *Svaayambhuva Manu*, also did *japa* with this *mantra*, and *Janaardana* was extremely pleased with him. 





## 57
This is continuation of the previous *shloka*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 11, Shloka 57:*** ***Dadou yathaa abhilaashitaam siddhim trailokya durlabhaam |*** ***Tathaa tvam api govindam toshaya etat sadaa japan ||*** That which cannot be easily obtained in all the three worlds, that *Janaardana* gave to *Svaayambhuva Manu*, who did *japa* with this mantra; *Svaayambhuva Manu* being your grandfather, you also do the same thing. Chanting this *mantra* continuously, all the time, you also try to please *Govinda*. With His grace, you will also attain whatever you desire. 



 [[386]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Dadou iti | Tathaa tvam iti | Kula devataa mantro hi sheeghram   
siddhyati |*** Because his grandfather had done this *japa* of *Janaardana*, He is *kula **devataa* for you, you should also do it, and you will very soon attain whatever you are seeking. 



This completes the Eleventh Chapter. *Saptarishis* have taught him the way in which he has to worship *Govinda*, the *mantra* which he has to chant, and how that can yield the desired fruits, because his own grandfather attained whatever he desired by chanting this *mantra* and worshipping *Govinda, **Janaardana* was extremely pleased with him and granted him all that he desired; you also chant this *mantra* and worship *Govinda*, He will be very pleased and He is the only one who can give you what you are desiring. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Prathame Amshe Ekaadasho Adhyaayah ||*** 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Prathame   
Amshe Ekaadasho Adhyaayah ||*** 



***|| Atha Dvaadasho Adhyaayah ||*** 
