+++
title = "13"

+++


*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 1:*** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Dhruvaacchistim cha bhavyam cha bhavyaat shambhuh vyajaayata |*** ***Shishteraajatta succhaayaa pancha putraan akalmashaan ||*** *Dhruva * had two sons - *Shishti * and *Bhavya. Bhavya * had a son named *Shambhu. Shishti's * wife *Succhaaya * gave birth to five sons, who were all without any blemish. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 2:*** ***Ripum ripunjayam vipram vrukalam vrukatejasam |*** ***Riporaadhatta bruhateem chaakshusham sarva tejasam ||*** *Ripu, Ripunjaya, Vipra, Vrukala, Vrukatejas*, were the names of those five sons. From *Ripu*, his wife *Bruhatee * gave birth to the illustrious *Chaakshusha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 3:***  [[439]] ***Ajeejanat pushkarinyaam vaarunyaam chaakshusho manum |*** ***Prajaapateh aatmajaayaam veeranasya mahaatmanah ||*** *Chaakshushaas*' wife was *Pushkarini*, of *Varuna kula, Vaaruni*, and daughter of the great *Varuna Prajaapati*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Ajeejanat iti | Chaakshushasya putrah shashto manuh prajaapateh iti   
ardham poorvena sambandhyate |*** He is the sixth *Manu * born in *Dhruva's * clan. *Veerana Pushkarini's * daughter gave birth to *Manu * of the sixth *Manvantara*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 4:*** ***Manorajaayanta dasha nadvalaayaam mahoujasah |*** ***Kanyaayaam tapataam sreshtha vairajasya prajaapateh ||*** From *Manu*, who was the excellent one among the sages, *Nadvalaa*, daughter of *Vairaaja Prajaapati*, had ten illustrious sons. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 5:*** ***\(Ooruh puruh\) kuruh purushshatadyumnah tapasvee satyavaan shuchih |*** ***Agnisthoma atiraatrah cha sudyumnah cha iti te nava |*** ***Abhimanyuh cha dashamo nadvalaayaam mahoujasah ||*** Their names are *Kuru, Puru, Shatadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavaan, Shuchi, **Agnisthoma, Atiraatra, Sudyumna * was ninth, tenth was *Abhimanyu*. They were very illustrious sons. 





 [[440]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 6:*** ***\(Oo\) Kuroh ajanayat putraan shadaagneyee mahaa prabhaan |*** ***Angam sumanasam khyaatim kratum angeerasam shibim ||*** From *Kuru, Aagneyee * gave birth to six sons, they were all very illustrious. *Anga, Sumanas, Khyaati, Kratu, Angiras, Shibi*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 7:*** ***Angaat suneethaa apatyam vai venam ekam ajaayata |*** ***Prajaartham rushayah tasya mamanthuh dakshinam karam ||*** From *Anga, Suneetha * gave birth to *Vena. Vena * did not have children; in order to continue his progeny, the sages churned his right hand. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Angaat iti | Suneethaa mrutyu duhitaa |*** *Suneethaa * was daughter of *Mrutyu*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 8:*** ***Venasya paanou mathite sambabhoova mahaa mune |*** ***Vainyo naama maheepaalo yah pruthuh parikeertitah ||*** When they churned his right hand, a king was born, son of *Vena*, well known as *Pruthu*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 9:*** ***Yena dugdhaa mahee poorvam prajaanaam hita kaaranaat ||***  [[441]] By *Pruthu*, the earth was milked, for the good of all people. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 10:*** ***Maitreyah - *** ***Kimartham mathitah paanih venasya paramarshibhih |*** ***Yatra jajnye mahaa veeryah sa pruthuh muni sattama ||*** *Maitreya * asked - Why did the sages churn the right hand of *Vena*? Where *Pruthu * was born, who had great valour. 



*Maitreyar * asks a question here. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 11:*** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Suneethaa naama yaa kanyaa mrutyoh prathamato abhavat |*** ***Angasya bhaaryaa saa dattaa tasyaam veno vyajaayata ||*** *Mrutyu * had a daughter by name *Suneethaa*. She was given as wife of *Anga*. To them was born *Vena*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 12:*** ***Sa maataamaha doshena tena mrutyo sutaatmajah |*** ***Nisargaat eva maitreya dushta eva vyajaayata ||*** *Mrutyu's * daughter's son *Vena*, by nature itself, was of wicked mind. Because of some sin committed by his maternal grandfather. 





 [[442]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 13:*** ***Abhishikto yadaa raajye sa venah paramarshibhih |*** ***Ghoshayaamaasa sa tadaa pruthivyaam pruthiveepatih ||*** All the *rishis * gathered and made him the king of that country. The king made a big announcement. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 14:*** ***Na yashtavyam na daatavyam na hotavyam kathanchana |*** ***Bhoktaa yajnyasya kah tu anyo hi aham yajnyapatih prabhuh ||*** Nobody should donate, nobody should perform any *yajnya*, nobody should perform any *homa*. I am the person who is to be worshipped by all the *yajnyaas*, I am the *yajnya pati*. Who else is there other than me? Who else is there who can receive the oblations offered in the *yajnya*? I am the king and am to be worshipped through *Yajnyaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 15:*** ***Tatah tam rushayah poorvam sampoojya pruthiveepatim |*** ***Oochuh saamakalam vaakyam maitreya samupasthitaah ||*** All the great sages gathered, and tried to console him, tell him what is right and wrong. To make him understand what is the truth, they told him having made him happy by praising him. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Saama saantvanam kalam avyakta madhuram |*** To appease him, told in a very pleasing way. 





 [[443]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 16:*** ***Rushayah oochuh -*** ***Bho bho raajan shrunushva tvam yat vadaama tavaantike |*** ***Raajya dehopabhogaaya prajaanaam cha hitam param ||*** *Rishis * said - O king, please do listen to what we are going to tell you, which will do ultimate good for all the people of this kingdom, and you can also enjoy the kingdom, and also be happy. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 17:*** ***Deergha satrena devesham sarva yajnyeshvaram harim |*** ***Poojayishyaama bhadram te \(tatraam\) tasya amshah te bhavishyati ||*** Let us worship *Hari * who is to be worshipped by all the *yajnyaas*. He is *Sarva **yajneshvara*, Lord of all the gods also. Let us perform *Deergha Satra yaaga*, which goes for a long time, and worship *Hari*. You will also get a part of that *havis *\(The king is supposed to get one sixth of the *havis * of the *yajnyaas*\). 



This is what *Bhagavaan * has told in the *Bhagavad Geetha, "Sarva **yajnyaanaam bhoktaa cha prabhuh eva cha" *. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Deergha satrena iti | Tasya amshah te bhavishyati iti paathah | Tasya   
- yajnyasya, amshah - shashta amshah |*** One sixth part. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 18:***  [[444]] ***Yajnyena yajnya purusho vishnuh sampreenito nrupa |*** ***Asmaabhih bhavatah kaamaan sarvaan eva pradaasyati ||*** When the *Yajnya Purusha*, the God who is to be worshipped through the *yajnyaas*, who is none other than *Sri Vishnu*, if He is pleased through this *yajnya*, He will bestow all our desires, yours as well as ours. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 19:*** ***Yajnyaih yajnyeshvaro hi eshaam raashtre sampoojyate harih |*** ***Teshaam sarva eepsita aavaaptim dadaati nrupa bhoobhrutaam ||*** In any kingdom, if the *Yajnyeshvara, Vishnu * is worshipped, through the *yajnya*, all the king's desires will be fulfilled. He will bestow everything if He is worshipped through *yajnyaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 20:*** ***Vena uvaacha - *** ***Mattah ko abhyadhiko anyo asti kaashchaaraadhyo mamaaparah |*** ***Ko ayam harih iti khyaato yo vo yajnyeshvaro matah ||*** Who is there greater than me? Who else is there who is above me? Who else has to be worshipped other than me? You are telling that *Hari * is *Yajnyeshvara*, who is that? 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 21:*** ***Brahmaa janaardanah shambhuh indro vaayuh yamo ravih |*** ***Hutabhuk varuno dhaataa pooshaa bhoomih nishaakarah ||*** 





 [[445]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 22:*** ***Ete chaanye cha ye devaah shaapa aanugraha kaarinah |*** ***Nrupasyaite shareerasthaah sarva deva mayo nrupah ||*** King is said to be *sarva deva maya*. All the gods reside in the body of a king -*Brahma, Janaardana, Shambhu, Indra, Vaayu, Yama, Ravi, Agni, Varuna, **Dhaataa, Pooshaa, Bhoomi, Nishaakara, * those who give *shaapa*, who do *anugraha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 23:*** ***Etat jnyaatvaa mayaa aajnyaptam yat yathaa kriyataam tathaa |*** ***Na daatavyam na yashtavyam na hotavyam cha bho dvijaah ||*** Knowing this, that all the gods reside in the body of a king, the order was given by me, and you have to obey that order. O *Brahmins*, nobody should do any *homa, yajnya, daana*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 24:*** ***Bhartru shushrooshanam dharmo yathaa streenaam paro matah |*** ***Maam aajnyaapaalanam dharmo bhavataam cha tathaa dvijaah ||*** Just as the *dharma * of a *stree * is to serve her husband in all possible ways, your *dharma * is also to obey my orders, to obey and serve me in every way. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 25:*** ***Rushayah oochuh -*** ***Dehi anujnyaam mahaaraaja maa dharmo yaato samkshayam |*** ***Havishaam parinaamo ayam yat etat akhilam jagat ||***  [[446]] *Rishs * said - You are doing a wrong thing, O king. Give us permission to perform the *Deergha Satra yaaga * which we have told, and let us worship *Vishnu*. Let not *dharma * become weak. As you know, this entire world is an effect of the *yajnyaas * only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Dehi iti | Havishaam parinaamah kaaryam vrushthyaadi dvaaraa \*   
Agnou praastaahuti iti ukta prakaarena | *** Only when *yajnyaas * are performed, rains come. Only when rains come, the grains are grown, and all kinds of prosperity can happen. One who is to be worshipped through *yajnyaas * is none other than Vishnu. 



The *rishis * advice the king that what he is doing is the wrong thing. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 26:*** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Iti vijnyapyamaano api sa venah paramarshibhih |*** ***Yadaa dadaati na anujnyaam proktah proktah punah punah ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- Not only once, they told him again and again, not to leave the path of dharma. But *Vena * did not listen to them. He did not allow them to perform the *yajnya*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 27:*** ***Tatah te munayah sarve kopaamarsha samanvitaah |*** ***Hanyataam hanyataam paapa iti oochuh te parasparam ||***  [[447]] The sages got very angry and lost their tolerance. They told each other than this king has to be killed, he is a sinner. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Amarsho titikshaa |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 28:*** ***Yo yajnya purusham vishnum anaadi nidhanam prabhum |*** ***Vinindati adhamaachaaro na sa yogyo bhuvah patih ||*** One who is ridiculing the *Yajnya Purusha, Mahaa Vishnu*, who is the overlord of everyone, and who has no beginning and end, who is to be worshipped through all the *yajnyaas*, is not in the right path. He does not deserve to live in this world. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 29:*** ***Ityuktvaa mantra pootaih taih kushaih muni ganaa nrupam |*** ***Nijaghnuh nihatam poorvam bhagavannindanaadinaa ||*** Telling like this, all the sages had the *darbha * grass concentrated with all the powers of *mantraas*, they hit him and killed the king *Vena*. He was already killed by ridiculing *Bhagavaan*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Iti iti | Devataa veda yajnya nindayaa dharma ananujnyayaa aatma   
prashamsayaa cha svayam eva hatatvaat tat hantuh na doshah iti   
bhaavah |***  [[448]] Though the sages killed the king when he did not have any progeny, there was no *dosha*, because by doing *devataa nindaa, veda nindaa, yajnya **nindaa*, and did not perform the *yajnya * to follow the *dharma*, he started praising himself in a wrong way, he thought he himself was overlord of all. So, he had already killed himself. There was nothing wrong in killing such a person in order to establish *dharma*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 30:*** ***Tatah cha munayo renum dadrushuh sarvato dvija |*** ***Kim etat iti cha aasannaan papracchuh te janaanstadaa ||*** After that, they saw a great amount of dust rising, in all places. They asked all the people around, what is this great dust rising up. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 31:*** ***Aakhyaatam cha janaih teshaam choreebhootaih araajake |*** ***Raashtre tu lokaih aarabdham parasva aadaanam aaturaih ||*** They said that when the kingdom does not have any king to enforce law and order, all the thieves and robbers become very powerful, and do all kinds of wrong things. They were all stealing other's property, looting people, and this is why the dust is seen. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 32:*** ***Teshaam udeernavegaanaam choraanaam munisattamaah |*** ***Sumahaan drushyate renuh para vittaapahaarinaam ||*** All the thieves who were looting people, stealing the wealth of others, this is the dust which you see all around. 





 [[449]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 33:*** ***Tatah sammantrya te sarve munayah tasya \(mantratah\) bhoobhrutah |*** ***Mamanthuh oorum putraartham anapatyasya yatnatah ||*** Then all the sages joined together and churned his thigh, he did not have any sons. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 34:*** ***Matthya \(tascha\) maanaat sumuttasthou tasya ooroh purushah kila |*** ***Dagdhasthoonaa prateekaashah kharvaatah cha ati hrasvakah ||*** When they churned his thigh, there arose a person, from his thigh. He was looking like a burnt charred log of wood, and was very short, ugly looking, dark. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Matthya maanaat iti | Matthyatah matthyamaanaat | Kharvaatah   
khalatih | Kharvaatah cha ati hrasvakah, iti cha paathah |   
Kharvaatasya iti paathe hrasva vaktrah |*** He was like a dwarf. 



He came out dark, from the thigh; all the sins of *Vena * were expelled through his body in that form. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 35:*** ***Kim karomi iti taan sarvaan vipraan aaha tvaraanvitah |*** ***Nisheedeti tam oochuh te nivaadastena so abhavat ||***  [[450]] As soon as he was born, he asked all the sages around "What should I do?". They said "Don't do anything, just sit down". He became known as *Nishaada*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 36:*** ***Tatah tat sambhavaa jaataa vindhya shaila nivaasinah |*** ***Nishaadaah muni shaardoola paapa karma upalakshanaah ||*** After this *Nishaadaa*, all his posterity are called *Nishaadaas*, and are living near *Vindhya * mountains. They were all robbers and thieves; they had bad qualities. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 37:*** ***Tena dvaarena tat paapam nishkraantam tasya bhoopateh |*** ***Nishaadaah te tato jaataa vena kalmasha naashanaah ||*** Through him, all the sins of *Vena * were expelled. They took away *Vena's * sins, and were called as *Nishaadaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 38:*** ***Tasya eva dakshinam hastam mamanthuh te tato dvijaah ||*** They then churned his right hand. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 39:*** ***Matthyamaane cha tatra abhoot pruthoh vainyah prataapavaan |*** ***Deepyamaanah sva vapushaa saakshaat agnih iva jvalan ||*** When they were churning like this, *Vena's * son *Pruthu * was born. Hew was radiant as though *Agni * himself had come out.  [[451]] 



When they do churning, *Agni * is produced. With this, they perform the *homa. * 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 40:*** ***Aadyamaajaghavam naama khaat papaat dato dhanuh |*** ***Sharaah cha divyaa nabhasah kavacham cha papaata ha ||*** After all *Vena's * sins were expelled, when *Pruthu * was born, he became a very noble person. As soon as he was born, a bow by name *Aajagava * fell from the sky. All the divine arrows, and the shield fell down from the sky. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Aadyam iti | Aajagavam eva aajagavam - pinaakah |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 41:*** ***Tasmin jaate tu bhootaani samprahrushtaani sarvashah ||*** The moment *pruthu * was born, all the beings were extremely pleased, and there was happiness all over. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 42:*** ***Satputrena cha jaatena veno api tridivam yayou |*** ***Punnaanmo narakaat traatah sa tena sumahaatmanaa ||*** *Vena * also went to *svarga*, as a good son was born to him. 



*Putrah punaamnaa narakaat traayate | *  [[452]] When a son is born, the parents will not attain a *Punnaama naraka*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 43:*** ***Tam samudraah cha nadyah cha raatnaani aadaaya sarvashah |*** ***Toyaani cha abhishekaartham sarvaani eva upatasvire ||*** All oceans and rivers took a human form, and brought all kinds of jewels, gold, diamonds, and also brought sacred waters for the *abhisheka * of *Pruthu*, and all came and stood there. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 44:*** ***Pitaamahah cha bhagavaan devaih aangeerasaih saha |*** ***Sthaavaraani cha bhootaani jangamaani cha sarvashah |*** ***Samaagamya tadaa vainyam abhyashinchan naraadhipam ||*** *Pitaamaha * himself came along with *Aangirasa * and the *devaas*, the trees, plants, beings, movables and immovables, all came. All came and did *abhisheka * for *Pruthu*. Such was the greatness of *Pruthu*. They were very pleased that such a noble person was born, and is the king. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Pitaamaha iti | Devaih aangeerasaih shashta manvantare taih devaih   
bhavishyadbhih | Sthaavaraani himavat aadi adhidevataani |*** The *devaas * who are going to be there in the sixth *manvantara * are called *aangirasaas. Himavaan * and other *adhidevataas * came. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 45:*** ***Haste to dakshine chakram drushtvaa tasya pitaamahah |***  [[453]] ***Vishnoh amsham pruthum matvaa paritosham param yayou ||*** *Pitaamaha Chaturmukha Brahma * was extremely happy, to see the mark of *Sudarshana Chakra * on his right arm. They were extremely pleased knowing that he is *Vishnu Amsha*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Hasta iti | Chakram rekhaamayam |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 46:*** ***Vishnu chinham kare chakram sarveshaam chakravartinaam |*** ***Bhavati avyaahato yasya prabhaavah tridashaih api ||*** Whoever has in the right hand the mark of *Vishnu Chakra*, they become *Chakravarthy*, and are unstoppable even by gods. His greatness cannot be limited by even the *devaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 47:*** ***Mahataa raaja raajyena pruthuh vainyah prataapavaan |*** ***So abhishikto mahaa tejaa vidhivat dharma kovidaih ||*** He was made king of kings, and *abhisheka * was performed by the sages and those people who knew the *dharma*, as per the *shaastraas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Mahataa iti | Raaja raajyena raajnynaam raajatvena |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 48:***  [[454]] ***Pitraa paraajitaah tasya prajaat tena anuranjitaah |*** ***Anuraagaat tatah tasya naama raajeti ajaayata ||*** All the people of that country who were treated very badly by *Vena, **Pruthu's * father, *Pruthu * looked after them extremely well. He was very loving towards them, and because of love towards people of his kingdom, became called as * Raajaa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 49:*** ***Aapastastambhire cha asya samudram abhiyaasyatah |*** ***Parvataah cha daduh maargam dhvaja bhangah cha na abhavat ||*** His greatness was so much, he was a *Vishnu Amsha*, had the sign of *Sudarshana Chakra * on his right hand; whenever he went outside with his *dhvaja*, the waters just stopped flowing out of respect. Whenever he went near the ocean, the waters flowed very slowly, out of great respect. All the mountains gave him way by themselves. His *dhvaja * was never put down. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Aapa iti | Dhvaja bhangah cha na abhavat vaneshu gacchatah pruthoh   
aanamra shaakhaagraa vrukshaah aasan abhavan |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 50:*** ***Akrushta pachyaa pruthivee siddhyantarthaani chintayaa |*** ***Sarva kaama dughaa gaavah putake putake madhu ||*** The earth, though it was never cultivated, without any farming, by just thinking itself, gave all kinds of prosperity. All the cows fulfilled the desires of the people, and honey was available in every cavity of the tree.  [[455]] Everything was abundant, there was lot of prosperity. People were very happy and contented. Kingdom became prosperous and good because of the king. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Akrushta pachyaa iti | Akrushta pachyaa pruthivee deha anantaram   
prajaakruta krushi aadi vinaa api saphalaa pruthivee, pruthu dugdha   
ksheera parinaama oushadhi aashrayatvaat | *** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 51:*** ***Tasya vai jaata maatrasya yajnye paitaamahe shubhe |*** ***Sootah sootyaam samutpannah soutyaih ahani mahaamatih ||*** When *Pruthu * was born, when *Pitaamaha * was the *devataa*. In the *yajnya * which *Pruthu * performed, *Soota * was born there, it was *Soma **yaaga*; the *soma * leaves are squashed to generate the *soma rasa*; from that *soma rasa, Soota * was born. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tasya iti | Tasya pruthoh, yajnye, paitaamahe pitaamaha daivatye \*   
Vainyasya hi pruthoh yajnye vartamaane mahaamanah | Sutyaayaam   
abhavat sootah \* iti vaayu ukteh | Sootyaam sutyaayaam   
somaabhishave jaate | Sooyate somo asyaam iti sootih | *** *Paitaamaha yajnya * means when *Pitaamaha * is the *devataa * for the *yajnya*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 52:*** ***Tasmin eva mahaa yajnye jajnye praajyo atha maagadhah |*** ***Prokto tadaa munivaraih tou ubhou soota maagadhou ||***  [[456]] In the same *yajnya*, another knowledgeable person, *Maagadha * was also born. They became to be called as *Soota Maagadha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 53:*** ***Stooyataam esha nrupatih pruthuh vainyah prataapavaan |*** ***Karma etat anuroopam cha paatram stotrasya vaam param ||*** All the sages told these two persons *Soota * and *Maagadha*, who were born in the same *yajnya*, that the king be praised by them. The son of *Vena, **Pruthu*, who is of great valour, you praise him, they said. All the acts that he has done are also in accordance with whatever praise he deserves. So that he does acts in accordance to whatever he is praised. 



We see *Soota * and *Maagadha * being there in the court of kings, praising the king. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Stooyataam iti | Oudaaryaadi gunaih esha stooyataam, paraakramaadi   
karma cha asya stooyataam |*** You have to praise him with qualities of benevolence. You have to praise all his acts of valour. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 54:*** ***Tatastaavoochatuh vipraan sarvaan eva krutaanjalee |*** ***Adya jaatasya no karma jnyaayate asya maheepateh ||*** They folded their hands and told all the *brahmins*, thus. We were just born now, how do we know the acts of the king?  [[457]] 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 55:*** ***Gunaa na cha asya jnyaayante na cha asya prathitam yashah |*** ***Stotram kim aashrayam tvasya kaaryam asmaabhih uchyataam ||*** We do not know his qualities also, and what is his fame attained through his qualities and acts he does. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Gunaa iti | Yasho hi guna kriyaa prasiddhih |*** From the qualities and all his acts, his fame also is known. 



You are telling us to praise his qualities and great acts that he has done. But we don't know anything. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 56:*** ***Rushayah oochuh -*** ***Karishyati esha yat karma chakravartee mahaabalah |*** ***Gunaa bhavishyaa ye cha asya taih ayam stooyataam nrupah ||*** *Rishis * said - Whatever he is going to do in future, as very powerful *chakravarthy*, and whatever qualities a *chakravarthy * is supposed to have, praise him with those qualities and acts which befit him. 



*Soota * and *Maagadha * praised all the qualities that ought to be present in a powerful *chakravarthy*, and all the acts that a *chakravarthy * is supposed to do.  [[458]] 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 57:*** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Tatah sa nrupatih tosham tat shrutvaa paramam yayou |*** ***Sadgunaih shlaaghyataameti tasmaat labhyaa gunaa mama ||*** When *Pruthu * heard all that praise, he became extremely pleased. By these good qualities, one attains a lot of fame, and gets respect with good qualities. So *Pruthu * decides that 'I have to cultivate these good qualities'. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Sadgunaih iti | Loke hi janah sadgunaih stutyo bhavati   
tasmaat mama - mayaa guna labhyaah sampaadyaah |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 58:*** ***Tasmaat yat adya stotre me guna nirvarnanam tu imou |*** ***Karishyete karishyaami tat eva aham samaahitah ||*** These two - whatever they are telling about my qualities that I am supposed to have, I will try to act in such a way that I will attain all those qualities. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tasmaat iti | Tat eva oudaaryaadi |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 59:*** ***Yat imou varjaneeyam cha kinchit atra vadishyatah |*** ***Tat aham varjayishyaami iti evam chakre matim nrupah ||***  [[459]] If they say that some things have to be given up, I will definitely give up those things. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 60:*** ***Atha tou chakratuh stotram pruthoh vainyasya dheematah |*** ***Bhavishyaih karmabhih samyak susvarou soota maagadhou ||*** By all the acts that he is supposed to do in future, they started praising him. With good *svara*, and very pleasingly, they started praising him. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 61:*** ***Satyavaak daana sheelo ayam satya sandho nareshvarah |*** ***Hreemaan maitrah kshamaa sheelo vikraanto dushta shaasanah ||*** He always tells the truth, he always donates a lot to the deserving people, he follows the path of *satya*, never tells a lie, this king, he is ashamed of doing bad deeds, he is friendly with everyone, he is very tolerant, he punishes the wicked. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Satyavaak iti | Hreeh akaaryaat lajjaa |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 62:*** ***Dharmajnyascha krutajnyascha dayaavaan priya bhaashakah |*** ***Maanyaan maanayitaa yajvaa brahmanyah saadhu sammatah ||*** He understands what is *dharma*, and follows the path of dharma, he knows what others have done to him and is grateful for that, he has compassion  [[460]] towards all, he always talks good things, he respects those who have to be respected, her performs *yaagaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 63:*** ***Samah shatrou cha mitre cha vyavahara sthitou nrupah ||*** He is equally disposed towards his enemies and friends, he is always following the path of *dharma*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sama iti | Vyavahaara sthito nrupa it icha paathah | Vyavahaara   
sthitah vyavahaara darshanaaya dharmaasanasthah |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 64:*** ***Sootena uktaan gunaan ittham sa tadaa maagadhena cha |*** ***Chakaara hrudi taadruk cha karmanaa krutavaan asou ||*** All these qualities which *Soota * and *Maagadha * told, he made up his mind and cultivated all these good qualities. He also put them into practice. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 65:*** ***Tatah sa pruthiveepaalah paalayan pruthiveem imaam |*** ***Iyaaja vividhaih yajnyaih mahadbhih bhoori dakshinaih ||*** He was now ruling over the earth, he worshipped all the *devaas * through *yajnyaas*, he performed great *yaagaas*. He gave lot of *dakshine * to the deserving people. 



 [[461]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Yajnyaih iyaaja deva poojaam akarot |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 66:*** ***Tam prajaah pruthivee naatham upatasthuh kshudhaarditaah |*** ***Oshadheeshu pranashtaasu tasmin kaale hi araajake |*** ***Tam oochuh te nataah prushtaah tatra aagamana kaaranam ||*** Now, suddenly, there is some kind of famine, all plants will dry up, and people will not have enough food and water. All the people of the country come to him, they were suffering from hunger, nothing was growing. They all bow down to him and tell him the reason why they are coming here. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tam iti | Tasmin kaale vena pruthu raajya sandhou tena aagamana   
kaaranam prushtaah tam oochuh |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 67:*** ***Prajaah oochuh -*** ***Araajake nrupa sreshtha dharitryaa sakaloushadheeh |*** ***Grastaah tatah kshayam yaanti prajaah sarvaah prajeshvara ||*** The people told - When no king is ruling over, all plants will dry up, and nothing will grow. Everything will be destroyed, people will be suffering. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Araajaka iti | Oshadheeh oshadhyah |***  [[462]] 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 68:*** ***Tvam no vrutti prado dhaatraa prajaa paalo niroopatih |*** ***Dehi nah kshut pareetaanaam prajaanaam jeevanoushadheeh ||*** Now, you have been told to be the king, make us get all the good things. We want to live happily. We are all suffering from hunger, and need to have food. 



They come and tell *Pruthu * that the people are suffering and need to be looked after. The story continues further. 



***Recap***: In the previous session, we had studied about the birth of *Pruthu*, son of *Vena*, when they churned his right hand. *Sootha * and *Maagadha * were also created there; they were asked to praise the great *Chakravarthy*; they said that they don't know his qualities and deeds; then the *rishis * said that whatever deeds he is going to do in future, and whatever good qualities he is going to be endowed with in future, praise them. Then they praise King *Pruthu * with all the good qualities he will have, and all the good deeds he is going to do. *Pruthu * takes a vow that he is going to cultivate all these good qualities, and give up all the bad qualities, and that he will also do all those deeds that they have told of him. *Sootha* and *Maagadha * whatever qualities they told thus, he took all those in his mind and started to cultivate those qualities, and also performed all the deeds that they told of him. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 65:*** ***Tatah sa pruthiveepaalah paalayan pruthiveem imaam |*** ***Iyaaja vividhaih yajnyaih mahadbhih bhoori dakshinaih ||***  [[463]] Having been endowed with all the great qualities, and doing all good deeds, the great king ruled over the entire earth, performed various *yajnyaas*, and also gave huge amounts of donation to everyone. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 66:*** ***Tam prajaah pruthivee naatham upatasthuh kshudhaarditaah |*** ***Oshadheeshu pranashtaasu tasmin kaale hi araajake |*** ***Tam oochuh te nataah prushtaah tatra aagamana kaaranam ||*** Now, *Paraasharar * tells about what happened when he became the king. All the people approached him, and were suffering from hunger. Because, when *Vena * did not allow anyone to do *yaagaas * and other good deeds, and after his death, there was no rule and order in the kingdom, all the plants and trees got destroyed. He asked them 'Why have you come here?'. They told him the reason why they have come. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tam iti | Tasmin kaale vena pruthu raajya sandhou tena aagamana   
kaaranam prushtaah tam oochuh |*** This is at the time when *Vena * died and *Pruthu * was born. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 67:*** ***Prajaah oochuh -*** ***Araajake nrupa sreshtha dharitryaa sakaloushadheeh |*** ***Grastaah tatah kshayam yaanti prajaah sarvaah prajeshvara ||*** The people said - O excellent among kings, when there is no king in a kingdom, the earth swallowed all the plants and herbs; at that time, all people suffer a lot.  [[464]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Araajaka iti | Oshadheeh oshadhyah |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 68:*** ***Tvam no vrutti prado dhaatraa prajaa paalo niroopitah |*** ***Dehi nah kshut pareetaanaam prajaanaam jeevanoushadheeh ||*** Now, you have become the king, and you have to rule over this place, you have to support us. *Brahma * has made you the king to rule over us, and look after our welfare, and show us the occupation, for our own living. We are all suffering from hunger, please do give us our life back. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 69:*** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Tatah tu nrupatih divyam aadaayaajagavam dhanuh |*** ***Sharaamscha divyaan kupitah so anvadhaavat vasundharaam ||*** *Sri Paraasharar * said - Then King *Pruthu * gets very angry with *Pruthivi*, the Earth, because everything was swallowed by the Earth. Ho took his divine bow which fell at the time of his birth, the *Aajagava*, and the divine arrows, and started to chase *Vasundharaa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 70:*** ***Tato nanaasha tvaritaa gaurbhootvaa cha vasundharaa |*** ***Saa lokaan brahma lokaadeen santraasaagadhaman mahee ||*** She disappeared from his sight, and ran away taking the form of a cow, immediately, sensing that there is danger. She ran over all the different  [[465]] worlds, all over, including the *Brahma Loka*, terribly scared of *Pruthu * when he started chasing her. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Nanaasha apalaayata \* Naashah palaayane mrutyou mruto   
cha \* iti vaijayantee |*** *Vaijayanti Kosha * gives the meaning of *nanaasha * as that she disappeared. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 71:*** ***Yatra yatra yayou devee saa tadaa bhoota dhaarinee |*** ***Tatra tatra tu saa vainyam dadrushe abhyudyataayudham ||*** Wherever she went, the one who supports all beings, she saw *Pruthu*, the son of *Vena * following her, wherever she went. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 72:*** ***Tatah tam praaha vasudhaa pruthum pruthu paraakramam |*** ***Pravepamaanaa tat baana paritraanaa paraayanaa ||*** She, who was trembling all over with fear, told *Pruthu * who is of great valour, seeking protection from his weapon. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 73:*** ***Pruthivi uvaacha -*** ***Stree vadhe tvam mahat paapam kim narendra na pashyasi |*** ***Yena maam hantum atyartham prakaroshi nrupodyamam ||***  [[466]] *Pruthivi * said - O Excellent among kings, are you not able to understand that it is a great sin to kill a woman. Without understanding that it is a great sin to kill a woman, you are trying to kill me, taking on your weapon. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 74:*** ***Pruthuh uvaacha -*** ***Ekasmin yatra nidhanam praapite dushta kaarinee |*** ***Bahunaam bhavati kshemam tasya punya prado vadhah ||*** *Pruthu * replied - For the sake of many, if one who is doing all bad things, is killed, it will help many. So, I don't see any sin in this, it is going to be a good deed only. You have done a bad thing by destroying all the herbs and plants. Killing you will be good only, it will lead to the good of many. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 75:*** ***Pruthivi uvaacha -*** ***Prajaanaam upakaaraaya yadi maam tvam hanishyasi |*** ***Aadhaarah kah prajaanaam te nrupasreshtha bhavishyati ||*** *Pruthivi * said - If for the good of the *prajaas*, you are going to kill me, O King, who will be the support for all the people? I am the support for everyone. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 76:*** ***Pruthuh uvaacha -*** ***Tvaam hatvaa vasudhe baanaih macchaasana paraanmukheem |*** ***Aatma yoga balenemaa dhaarayishyaami aham prajaah ||***  [[467]] *Pruthu * said - O Earth, by my divine arrows, I will kill you, you have crossed over my rules. Having killed you, by my own capabilities, I will support all the people. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tvaam iti | Yogah saamarthyam tat eva balam | \* Aatmaanam   
prathayitvemaa dhaarayishyaami aham prajaah \* iti harivamshe |*** *Yoga * means, my own power. *Harivamsha * says - 'I will make myself as big, I am capable of that. I will support all of them'. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 77:*** ***Sri Paraasharah - *** ***Tatah pranamya vasudhaa tam brooyah praaya parthivam |*** ***Pravepitaangee paramam saadhvasam samupaagataa ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- Earth was really terrified that he was capable of all that. She bowed down to him, and again she requested him, trembling all over, being terrified. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 78:*** ***Pruthivi uvaacha -*** ***Upaayatah samaarabdhaah sarve siddhyanti upakramaah |*** ***Tasmaat vadaami upaayam te tam kurushva yat icchasi ||*** *Pruthivi * said - All deeds started with proper planning and with the right means, will all yield proper results. If you are interested, I will tell you a means by which you can do all that, and still support your people. 





 [[468]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 79:*** ***Samastaa yaa mayaa jeernaa naranaatha mahoushadheeh |*** ***Yadi icchasi pradaasyaami taah ksheera parinaamineeh ||*** All the herbs and plants that I have swallowed, if you like, I can give all those things to you in the form of milk. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Samastaa iti | Ksheera parinaamineeh ksheerena parinaamineeh |*** All being converted into milk. 



Whatever herbs and plants that I have digested, I will convert all of them into milk and give you. With that, you can support all your people and live happily. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 80:*** ***Tasmaat prajaa hitaarthaaya mama dharmabhrutaam vara |*** ***Tam tu vatsam \(prayaccha\) kurushva tvam kshareyam yena vatsalaa ||*** For the good of all your people, O Excellent among those who support *Dharma*, create a cow for me, through which I can start to give milk. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 81:*** ***Samaam cha kuru sarvatra yena ksheeram samantatah |*** ***Varoushadhee beeja bhootam veera sarvatra bhaavaye ||***  [[469]] Not only that, you make all the fields level, so that I can make my milk to flow all over the place. The milk is like the seed for all kinds of plants and trees. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Samaam iti | Samaam samasthalaam, yena sameekarena bhaavaye   
utpaadaye |*** Level fields. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 82:*** ***Sri Paraasharah -*** ***Tata utsaarayaamaasa shailaan shata sahasrashah |*** ***Dhanushkotyaa tathaa vainyah tena shailaa vivarddhitaah ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- Using the end of the divine bow, *Vena's * son *Pruthu*, started to uproot all the mountains, hundreds of thousands of them, and started to make them even. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tata iti | Tena utsaarena vivartitaah kshiptaah | Vivarditaa iti paathe   
ekatra punjeekrutaah | Vivarjitaa iti paathe utsaarana deshe   
vivarjitaa iti |*** There are three *paathaantaraas*. One means thrown around. Another means that they were all collected in one place. He uprooted them and put them in another place. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 83:***  [[470]] ***Na hi poorva visarge vai vishame pruthiveetale |*** ***Pravibhaagah puraanam vaa graamaanaam vaa puraa abhavat ||*** Then he divided all the places, made them level, and created villages, towns, cities. Before *Pruthu's * time, there was no division of city, village, etc. The division of villages, cities, etc. was first done by *Pruthu * only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Na hi iti | Poorva nisarga iti cha paathah | Poorva nisarge poorva   
avasthaayaam | Puraa pruthoh poorva kaale |*** Earlier days, before *Pruthu's * time. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 84:*** ***Na sasyaani na gorakshyam na krushih na vanik pathaah |*** ***Vainyaat prabhruti maitreya sarvasya etasya sambhavah ||*** Before him, all the plants were not there. Protecting cows and looking after them was not there. Cultivation was not there. Various means of doing business were not existing at all. They were all started by *Vena's * son *Pruthu*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 85:*** ***Yatra yatra samam tu asyaa bhoomeh aaseet dvijottama |*** ***Tatra tatra prajaah sarvaah nivaasam samarochayan ||*** Wherever the earth was even and it was possible to live, at all those places, people started to come and reside there. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 86:***  [[471]] ***Aahaarah phala moolaani prajaanaam abhavat tadaa |*** ***Krucchrena mahataa so api pranashtaasu oshadheeshu vai ||*** At that time, all the fruits and roots which are the food of people, it was only possible with great difficulty. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 87:*** ***Sa kalpayitvaa vatsam tu manum svayambhuvam prabhum |*** ***Sva paanou pruthivee naatho dudhoha pruthiveem pruthuh ||*** At that time, *Pruthu * made *Swaayambhuva Manu * as the calf, and *Pruthivi * which was present in the form of a cow, he milked her with his own hands. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Sa iti | Sasyam manushyaanaam yonim sasyam, pruthuh dudhoha |   
Tatra dohe pruthuh eva yajamaanah rutvik cha |*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 88:*** ***Sasya \(beejaani\) jaataani sarvaani prajaanaam hita kaamyayaa |*** ***Tena annena prajaah taata vartante adya api nityashah ||*** All the plants and food grew, for the good of all the people. To this day and for all time, the people are living with food, which grew. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 89:*** ***Praana pradaataa sa pruthuh yasmaat bhoomet abhoot pitaa |*** ***Tatassu pruthivee samjnyaam avaapaakhila dhaarinee ||***  [[472]] Because he protected her and gave back her life, he became her father. That is why she, who supports all the beings, is called as *Pruthu's * daughter, *Pruthivi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Praana iti | Praana pradaataa abhaya pradah \* Janakascha upanetaa   
cha yah cha vidyaam prayacchati | Anna daataa bhaya traataa   
panchaite pitarah smrutaah || iti vachanaat |*** *Pruthu * saved her. There is a saying that the father, one who does *upanayana*, one who teaches, one who gives food, one who protects from calamities, they are all said to be fathers. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 90:*** ***Tatah cha devaih munibhih daityaih rakshobhih adribhih |*** ***Gandharvaih uragaih yakshaih pitrubhih tarubhih tathaa ||*** 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 91:*** ***Tat tat paatram upaadaaya tat tat dugdham muneh payah |*** ***Vatsadogdhru visheshaah cha teshaam tat yonayo abhavan ||*** Here *Paraasharar * tells about how the ten groups of creation, *devaas *\(gods\), *munis *\(sages\), *daityaas \(asuraas\), **raakshasaas, * mountains, *gandharvaas*, snakes, *yakshaas, pitrus*, the plants, they milked the earth with their suitable vessels to collect the milk, and making a suitable calf for whatever they want, the proper person to milk. 



This is explained in detail in other *Puraanaas, Maatsya Puraana*, etc. 



 [[473]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tat tat paatram iti | Pruthu upadeshaat devaadibhih tat tat vatsaih   
tat tat paatram upaadaaya bhooh tat tat payo dugdhaa | Devaadyaih   
yajamaanah sthaaneeyaih dasha vargaih rutvik sthaaneeyaih soorya   
bruhaspati dvimurddha jatunaabha meru vasuruchi dhrutaraashtra   
suparna antaka saalaakhya dogdhru visheshaih, indra soma virochana   
sumaali himavat chitraratha takshaka kubera maya plakshaakhya vatsa   
visheshaih souvarnam cchandomayam aayasam kaapaalam shailam   
padmapatram alaavu apakvamrunmayam raajatam paalaasham iti tat   
tat paatram aadaaya balam tapah maayaam rudhiram oshadheeh   
ratnam gandham visham antardhaanam svadhaam punah prarohanam iti   
ksheera vishesham maatsyaadi shookta kramena dugdhaa | Atra naama   
bhedah tu naamaantaratvena boddhyah | Teshaam iti | Teshaam deva   
aadeenaam sooryaadeenaam indraadeenaam cha | Tat yonayah taani   
balaadeeni yonayah kaaranam |*** For *devaas*, the *dogdhru*, one who milks the cow was different, the calf was specific to them; the vessel in which they collect the milk was specific to them; the milk which they collect is also different. For each one, it was different. Whatever they wanted according to their nature, they milked those things from *Pruthivi. Devaas, munis, daityaas * are all the *yajamaanaas * who perform the *yajnya. Soorya, Bruhaspati*, etc. were in the form of *dogdhru*, the person who milks the cow. *Indra, Soma*, etc. were the calves for the ten groups. *Sourvarna, Chandomaya*, etc. were the ten vessels. *Balam, Tapa*, etc. were the ten varieties of milk, this is told in the *Maatsya Puraana*. 



The following table shows this. 



Who यजमान \(दो धृ\) ऋि वक् \(व स\) पा ीर देवै: Sun - सूय इ Gold vessel-Superhuman सौवणम् Power-बलम्  [[474]] मुिनिभ: बृह पित सोम दोमयम् तप: दै यै: ि मू िवरोचन आयसम् – iron मायाम् र ोिभ: जतुनाभ सुमािल कापालम् िधरम् अ िभ: मे िहमवत् शैलं – crystal ओषधी:, र म् mountains ग धव: वसु िच िच रथ प प म् ग धम् उरगै: धृतरा त क अलाबु – gourd िवषम् य ै: सुपण कुबेर अप मृ मयम् अ तधानम् िपतृिभ: अ तक मय राजतम् वधाम् त िभ: साल ल पालाशम् पुन: रोहणम् 



*Devaas * got the cow milked. They are the *yajamaanaas*. The person who milked was *Soorya*, for the *Devaas*. For *Munis*, the *dogdhru * was *Bruhaspati*. For *Daityaas*, it was *Dvimoordha*. For *Raakashasaas*, it was *Jatunaabha*. For *Adris*, mountains, it was *Meru*. For *Gandharvaas*, it was *Vasuruchi*. For *Uragaas*, snakes, it was *Dhrutaraashtra*. For *Yakshaas*, it was *Suparna*. For *Pitrus*, it was *Antaka, Yama*. For *Tarus*, it was *Saala*. The *Vatsa*, calf for these were *Indra, Soma, Virochana, Sumaali, Himavat, Chitraratha, **Takshaka, Kubera, Maya, Plaksha*, in order. The vessel in which they collected were *Souvarna *\(Gold vessel for *Devaas*\), *Chandomaya *\(vessel of *Veda * for *Munis*\), *Aayasam *\(vessel iron for the *Daityaas*\), *Kaapaala * for the *Raakshasaas, Shaila *\(crystal\) for the *Adris, Padma patra *\(lotus leaves\) for *Gandharvaas, Alaavu *\(gourd\) for the *Uragaas, Apakva **mrunmaya *\(uncooked earth\) for the *Yakshaas, Raajata *\(silver vessel\) for the *Pitrus, Paalaasha * for the *Tarus*. The milk that they obtained from *Pruthivi*, is the seed for everything; it got converted into whatever they desired - *Devaas * got *bala*, superhuman power; *Munis * milked tapas; *Daityaas * milked *maayaa; Raakshasaas * milked *rudhira*, blood; Mountains milked *oshadhees * and *ratna*, gems and trees,  [[475]] plants; *Gandharvaas * milked *gandha; Uragaas * milked poison; *Yakshaas * milked *antardhaana*, the *vidyaa * to disappear; *Pitrus * milked *svadhaa*; and *Tarus * milked *punah prarohana*. 



*Pruthvi * said that she would provide everything in the form of milk. This is the seed for all kinds of things digested, and will get converted to whatever they desire. Using the proper *dogdhru*, with the proper calf, with the proper vessel, they get the desired fruits, the *ksheera*, milk. *Devaas * making *Soorya * as the *dogdhru*, Indra as the calf, in the golden vessel, they milked *bala*, superhuman power. *Rishis*, making *Bruhaspati * as the *dogdhru, Soma * as the calf, *Vedaas * as the vessel, milked *tapas*. Like this, each of the ten groups is told. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 92:*** ***Saa eshaa dhaatree vidhaatree cha dhaarinee poshanee tathaa |*** ***Sarvasya tu tatah pruthvee vishnu paada talodbhavaa ||*** *Pruthivi * was born from the feet of *Vishnu*. She became *Dhaatree, **Vidhaatree, Dhaarinee *\(support\), *Poshanee *\(nourisher\), etc. of all. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Saishaa iti | Dhaatree maataa | Vidhaatree kartree |*** *Dhaatree * is mother. *Vidhaatree * is doer of all things. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 93:*** ***Evam prabhaavah sa pruthuh putro venasya veeryavaan |*** ***Jajnye maheepatih poorvo raajaa abhoot jana ranjanaat ||***  [[476]] Such was the greatness of *Pruthu * of great valour, son of *Vena*. He was looking after the welfare of all people, and was very kind and compassionate. Everyone liked him very much. So he was called *Raajaa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 94:*** ***Ya idam janma vainyasya pruthoh sankeertayet narah |*** ***Na tasya dushkrutam kinchit phaladaaye prajaayate ||*** Whoever recites this birth of *Pruthu*, son of *Vena*, about all his greatness, and the great things that he achieved, whatever bad deeds he might have done, they will not give fruit \(the bad deeds will get destroyed\). 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 13, Shloka 95:*** ***Dussvapna upashamanam nruunaam shrunvataam etat adbhutam |*** ***Pruthoh janma prabhaavah cha karoti satatam shubham ||*** Those who listen to this story of *Pruthu*, his greatness, all their bad dreams will be destroyed; they will never get bad dreams. His auspicious birth, his greatness, his qualities, capabilities, whoever recites all the time, they will get all good; for them there will be no bad dreams; all their bad deeds will get destroyed. 



With this the Thirteenth Chapter comes to an end. *|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Prathame Amshe Trayodasho Adhyaayah ||* 



*|| Iti Sti Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Sri Vishnu Chitteeye Prathame Amshe **Trayodasho Adhyaayah ||* 



 [[477]] ***|| Atha Chaturdasho Adhyaayah ||*** 



Now, the Fourteenth Chapter. 


