+++
title = "15"

+++


*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 1:   
Sri Paraasharah -   
Tapascharatsu pruthiveem prachetassu maheeruhaah |   
Arakshyamaanaamaavavruh babhoovaatha prajaakshayah || ****Sri Paraashara * says - When they were deeply immersed in penance like this, the entire world was filled by trees, growing by great proportions. Mankind declined, and nobody could survive because the plants completely filled the world. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 2:   
Naashakanmaruto vaatum vruttam khamabhavat drumaih |   
Dasha varsha sahasraani na shekuh cheshtitum prajaah || ***The trees went up to the sky, and air was not able to blow at all. People were not able to move around or do any functioning, for ten thousand years. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 3:   
Taan drushtvaa jala nishkraantaah sarve kruddhaah prachetasah |   
Mukhebhyo vaayum agnim cha te asrujan jaata manyavah || ***Seeing such a sorry state in the world, the *Prachetasaas * got very angry, and becoming very angry, they blew air and fire through their mouth. 





 [[497]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 4:   
Unmoolaan atha taan vrukshaan krutvaa vaayuh ashoshayat |   
Taan agnih adahatghorah tatra abhoot druma samkshayah || ***The air that they blew was so powerful that it uprooted all the trees, and the air dried everything. The fire which they blew burnt everything. Then, there was a severe lack of trees. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 5:   
Drumakshayam atho drushtvaa kinchit shishteshu shaakhishu |   
Upagamya abraveet etaan raajaa somah prajaapateen || ****Soma*, who is the king of all trees and plants, came and told the *Prachetasaas*, seeing all the destruction of the trees, and few branches being left over. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Drumakshayam iti | Raajaa vrukshaadeenaam |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 6:   
Kopam yacchata raajaanah shrunudhvam cha vacho mama |   
Sandhaanam vah karishyaami saha kshitiruhairaham ||*** O great kings, please do control your anger and listen to me. I will make sure that trees and plants are not going to cause more trouble to you. I will make sure that they live in peace with you. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 7:   
Ratnabhootaa cha kanyaa iyam vaarksheyee vara vaarinee |   
Bhavishyat jaanataa poorvam mayaa gobhih vivardhitaa || ***I also have this wonderful woman, gem of a woman, one who is born of the trees. I am protecting this gem of a woman, excellent among women. Through my grace, I have nurtured her, knowing the future what is going to happen. 



In future, what will happen is that this daughter of the trees will be your wife, and will give birth to *Daksha Prajaapati*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** [[498]] ***Ratnabhootaa iti | Vaarksheyee vrukshajaa | Bhavishyat - dasha   
prachetasaam patnee dakshasya maataa cha bhavishyati iti adhikam   
jaanataa mayaa | Gobhih rashmibhih |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 8:   
Maarishaa naama naamna eshaa vrukshaanaam iti nirmitaa |   
Bhaaryaa vo astu mahaabhaaga dhruvam vamsha vivardhinee || ***She was given birth to by the trees, and has the name *Maarishaa*. She is going to help you and is going to be the cause of expansion of your progeny. She will be the wife of you, the ten *Prachetasaas*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Maarishaa iti | Naama prasiddhaa maarishaa iti naamnaa prasiddhaa |   
Vrukshanaam iti | Vrukshanaam sambandhinee vaarkshyeyaa iti   
nirmitaa |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 9:   
Yushmaakam tejaso ardhena mama cha ardhena tejasah |   
Asyaam utpatsyate vidvaan daksho naama prajaapatih ||*** With half of your *tejas*, and half of my *tejas*, in her, one *Prajaapati * is going to be born, by name *Daksha*. 



The story of *Daksha Prajaapati * will come later. Before that, the story of *Maarishaa * will come, how she became the daughter of the trees. The story of *Kandu Maharshi * will also come. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 10:   
Mama cha amshena samyukto yushmat tejomayena vai |   
Tejasaa agnisamo bhooyah prajaah samvardhayishyati || ****Daksha * having my *amsha*, and also your *tejas*, both, *Maarishaa * and *Prachetasaas*, and *Maarishaa * was nurtured by *Soma * also, *Daksha * will have all qualities like fire, *veerya, shourya*, and will also have all pleasing qualities, which are *Soma's gunaas*, and he will help in expanding the mankind. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** [[499]] ***Mama cha iti | Mama douhitratvaat mama amshena soumyena   
shaantyaadi bahulena maatru gunena yushmat tejas sambhavena   
aagneya amshena krourya shouryaadi pitru gunena cha yuktah prajaah   
samvardhayishyati sargasya agnishomaatmakatvaat | ***



Now, he starts to tell about the birth of *Maarishaa*, and *Kandu Maharshi*. 



***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying how ten *Prachetasaas * did tapas for ten thousand years, under water and *Mahaa Vishnu * appeared in front of them, and gave them the boon that they want to continue mankind as per their father's orders. Brahma had told their father that mankind has to be continued. *Bhagavaan * is very pleased with their tapas. After they come out of water, they see that the entire earth is filled with trees, which have grown too high, and even air is not able to blow, everything is blocked and choked, people are dying. They get very angry, and create *Agni * and *Vaayu; Agni * burns everything, and *Vaayu * dries up the trees, and everything starts getting destroyed. *Soma * who is the king of the trees comes in front of them, and says that there is a lady called *Maarisha*. Knowing the future that she is going to be your wife, I have protected her with my rays, and nurtured her. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 7:   
Ratnabhootaa cha kanyaa iyam vaarksheyee vara vaarinee |   
Bhavishyat jaanataa poorvam mayaa gobhih vivardhitaa ||*** I also have this wonderful woman, gem of a woman, one who is born of the trees. I am protecting this gem of a woman, excellent among women. Through my rays, I have nurtured her, knowing the future what is going to happen. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ratnabhootaa iti | Vaarksheyee vrukshajaa | Bhavishyat - dasha   
prachetasaam patnee dakshasya maataa cha bhavishyati iti adhikam   
jaanataa mayaa | Gobhih rashmibhih | ***





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 8:   
Maarishaa naama naamna eshaa vrukshaanaam iti nirmitaa | *** [[500]] ***Bhaaryaa vo astu mahaabhaaga dhruvam vamsha vivardhinee || ***She is the daughter of the trees, *vrukshaas*, and is called as *Maarishaa*. She will become your wife and will continue the progeny, and help you in expanding the mankind. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Maarishaa iti | Naama prasiddhaa maarishaa iti naamnaa prasiddhaa |   
Vrukshanaam iti | Vrukshanaam sambandhinee vaarkshyeyaa iti   
nirmitaa |*** She is related to the *vrukshaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 9:*** ***Yushmaakam tejaso ardhena mama cha ardhena tejasah |*** ***Asyaam utpatsyate vidvaan daksho naama prajaapatih ||*** With half of my *tejas * and half of your *tejas*, she will give birth to a very knowledgeable son, a *Prajaapati*, called *Daksha*.   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 10: *****Mama cha amshena samyukto yushmat tejomayena vai |***** *****Tejasaa agnisamo bhooyah prajaah samvardhayishyati ||*** He will increase the mankind, he will be having the *tejas * of *Agni*, having been endowed with half of your *amsha*, and half of my *amsha*, ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Mama cha iti | Mama douhitratvaat mama amshena soumyena   
shaantyaadi bahulena maatru gunena yushmat tejas sambhavena   
aagneya amshena krourya shouryaadi pitru gunena cha yuktah prajaah   


samvardhayishyati sargasya agnishomaatmakatvaat |*** *Srushti * is said to be *Agnishomaatmaka*, with *Agni * and *Soma*, the *devataas * in the *Agnishomiya Yajnya * which is done. *Daksha Prajaapati * will have my *amsha*, he will have all the pleasing qualities, as well as the qualities of a mother, *Maarishaa * being the daughter of the trees. And *Soma * is the king of the trees. *Prachetasaas * are *Agneya Amsha*; so for the *pitru gunaas*, he will have *krourya, shourya*, he will be a very good king, and help in increasing the mankind. *** *** [[501]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 11:   
Kanduh naama munih poorvam aaseet vedavidaam varah |   
Suramye gomatee teere sa tepe paramam tapah ||*** There was a *rishi * called *Kandu*, well versed in the *Vedaas*, on the pleasant banks of *Gomati * river, he was performing tapas. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kanyaayaa aabhijaatyajnyaanaaya tat janam aaha kandurityaadinaa |*** Now, in order to tell the *Prachetasaas * that *Maarishaa * is born in a good *vamsha*, he starts to tell about the story of *Kandu Maharshi*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 12:   
Tat kshobhaaya surendrena pramlochaakhyaa varaapsaraah |   
Prayuktaa kshobhayaamaasa tam rishim saa shuchismitaa ||*** In order to disturb his penance, Indra sends the *apsaras Pramlochaa*. She started to disturb his tapas. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 13:   
Kshobhitasya tayaa saarddham varshaanaam adhikam shatam |   
Atishtat mandaradronyaam vishayaasakta maanasah ||*** He gets attracted to her, and *tapas * will be broken. He lives with her more than hundred years, in *Mandaraachala*, enjoying her company. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 14:   
Tam saa praaha mahaabhaaga gantum icchaami aham divam |   
Prasaada sumukho brahman anujnyaam daatum arhasi ||*** After hundred plus years, she tells *Kandu Maharshi*, that 'I desire to go back to *Deva Loka*, be pleased and do allow me to return to *Deva Loka*'. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 15:   
Tayaa evam uktah sa munih tasyaam aasakta maanasah |   
Dinaani katichit bhadre stheeyataam iti abhaashata ||*** Being very much attached to her, he tells her to stay for some more time. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 16:   
Evam uktaa tatah tena saagram varsha shatam punah | *** [[502]] ***Bubhuje vishayaanstanvee tena saakam mahaatmanaa || ***Being told like that, she stays for another hundred plus years, with him, enjoying his company, with all kinds of pleasures. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 17:   
Anujyaam dehi bhagavan vrajaami tridashaalayam |   
Uktah tathaa iti sa punah stheeyataam iti abhaashata || ***After hundred plus years, she again asks him to 'Please give me permission to go back to *Deva Loka*'. He says 'No, please stay for some more time'. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 18:   
Punargate varsha shate saadhike saa shubhaananaa |   
Yaami iti aaha divam brahman pranayasmita shobhanam ||*** Again hundred plus years passed like that. Again she says 'I want to go back to *Deva Loka*, please give me permission'. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 19:   
Uktah tayaa evam sa munih upaguhyaayatekshanaam |   
Praahaasyataam kshanam subhru chirakaalam gamishyasi ||*** Being told like that, he embraced her and told her 'Please stay for a little more while, because you are going to go away for a long time'. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 20:   
Saa kreedamaanaa sushronee saha tenarshinaa punah |   
Shatadvayam kinchit oonam varshanaam anvatishthata || ***Enjoying his company, and giving him all kinds of pleasures, she stayed with him for little less than two hundred years. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 21:   
Gamanaaya mahaabhaaga devaraajaniketanam |   
Proktah proktah tayaa tanvyaa stheeyataam iti abhaashata || ***Again and again, whenever she wanted to go back, he again keeps telling her to stay for some more time. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 22:   
Tasya shaapa bhayaat bheetaa daakshinyena cha dakshinaa | *** [[503]] ***Proktaa pranayabhangaarthi vedinee na jahou munim || ***She being very scared of his *shaapa*, that he may curse her if she goes against his wishes, and also knowing his suffering if his passion in her is broken, she does not leave him. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tasya iti | \* Yaa gouravam bhayam prema sadbhaavam poorvanaayake   
| Na munchati anya chittaa api saa jnyeyaa dakshinaa budhaih ||   
Dakshinaayaa bhaavo daakshinyam | Pranayo yaanchaa | ***This is one kind of *naayaki * in *naatya*, a *naayaki * who has respect, fear, love, and good feelings towards her earlier hero, even though she is interested in someone else, is called as *Dakshinaa*, in *Naayta shaastra*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 23:   
Tayaa cha ramatah tasya paramarsheh aharnisham |   
Navam navam abhoot prema manmathaavishtha chetasah || ***Staying with her, and enjoying her company, day by day, his interest in her, and passion goes on increasing. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 24:   
Ekadaa tvarayaa yukto nishchakraama utajaat munih |   
Nishkraamantam cha kutreti gamyate praaha saa shubhaa || ***One day, he hurriedly started to leave the hermitage. She asked him 'Where are you going?'. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ekadaa iti | Utajah parnashaalaa |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 25:   
Iti uktah sa tayaa praaha parivruttamahah shubhe |   
Sandhyopaasthim karishyaami kriyaa lopo anyathaa bhavet || ***Being asked by her, he said that the day has come to end, I am going to do *Sandhyopaasanaa*, otherwise I will be failing in my duties. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 26:   
Tatah prahasya sudatee tam saa praaha mahaamunim | *** [[504]] ***Kim adya sarva dharmajnya parivruttamahaastava ||*** Smilingly she says 'What, today your day has ended'. She makes fun of him. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tata iti | Parivrutam parinatam | Sarva dharmajnya iti gata bahu abda   
kruta vismarana upaalambhaah | ***That he has forgotten to perform his duties for so many days. This is meant in *sarva dharmajnya*. Hence she tells him like that - 'After so many days, you are telling today that your day has ended'. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 27:   
Bahoonaam vipra varshaanaam parivruttamahah tava |   
Gatam etat na kurute vismayam kasya katthyataam ||*** Many years have gone. When you are telling like this, who does not get surprised. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bahoonaam iti | Tava bahoonaam varshaanaam gataanaam sataam   
ahah parinaamam gatam iti etat kasya vismayam na kurute ? Idam   
kathyataam |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 28:   
Munih uvaacha -   
Praatah tvam aagataa bhadre nadee teeram idam shubham |   
Mayaa drushtaasi tanvangi pravishtaasi mama aashramam || ****Kandu Maharishi * says - You have come in the morning, on the banks of this river. I saw you and took you to my hermitage. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 29:   
Iyam cha vartate sandhyaa parinaama mahargatam |   
Upahaasah kimartho ayam sadbhaavah kathyataam mama || ***Now, it is evening. So, one day has gone. Why are you making fun of me. Tell me the truth. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Iyam iti | Sadbhaavah satyam | *** [[505]] ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 30:   
Pramlochaa uvaacha -   
Pratyooshasyaagataa brahman satyam etat na tat mrushaa |   
Tadvat gatasya kaalasya gataanyabdha shataani te || ****Pramlochaa * says - It is true that I came in the morning. That is not a lie. In the same way, hundreds of days have already passed. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 31:   
Somah uvaacha -   
Tatah sa saadhvaso viprah taam papracchaayatekshanaam |   
Kathyataam bheeru kah kaalah tvayaa me ramatah saha || ****Soma * says - Being very disturbed, he asks her - Tell me how long did I spend with you in your company. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tata iti | Kah - kiyaan |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 32:   
Pramlochaa uvaacha -   
Saptottaraanyateetaani nava varsha shataani te |   
Maasaah cha shat tathaaeva anyat samateetam dina trayam || ****Pramlocha * says - Nine hundred and seven years, six months and three days, have passed in my company. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 33:   
Rishih uvaacha -   
Satyam bheeru vadasyetat parihaaso athavaa shubhe |   
Dinamekam aham manye tvayaa saardhamihaasthitam || ****Rishi * says - Are you telling the truth, or are you simply making fun of me? I feel as though I have just spent a day with you. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 34:   
Pramlochaa uvaacha -   
Vadshyaami anrutam brahman katham atra tavaantike |   
Visheshena adya bhavataa prushtaa maargaanuvartinaa || *** [[506]] *Pramlochaa * say - O great sage, how can I tell a lie to you when I am with you? Especially today, when you are wanting to perform your duties, and going on the path of dharma, how can I tell you a lie? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vadishyaami iti | Maargaanuvartinaa raaga krutam utpatham tyaktvaa   
vivekaat svadharma anusandhitsayaa parihaasa anarhena |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 35:   
Somah uvaacha -   
Nishamya tat vachah satyam sa munih nrupanandanaah |   
Dhik dhik maam iti ateevettham ninindaatmaanam aatmanaa || ****Soma * said - Seeing that what she is telling is true, the *Muni * says, feeling very bad that such a thing happened - 'Shame on me'. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 36:   
Munih uvaacha -   
Tapaamsi nashtaani hatam brahma brahmavidaam dhanam |   
Hruto vivekah kenaapi yoshit mohaaya nirmitaa ||*** *Kandu Maharshi * says - All my tapas is destroyed. *Brahman*, the wealth of the *Brahmavits *- knowers of *Brahman * is lost for me. My *viveka * is destroyed. Someone has created woman only for delusion. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tapaamsi iti | Hatam brahma vismruto vedah | ****Brahma hatam – brahma* is lost means *Veda * is forgotten. Means I forgot *Vedas *\(being immersed in sense pleasures\). ***   
   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 37:   
Oormishakaatigam brahma jnyeyam aatma jayena me |   
Matireshaa hrutaa yena dhik tam kaamam mahaagraham ||*** That Brahman who can be known by realizing the self, crossing over the *oormi shatkaas*. I wanted to cross over the *oormi shatkaas * and wanted to realize Brahman through realizing the self. That is destroyed. By *kaama*, that is destroyed.  [[507]] ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Oormi iti | \* Ashanaayaapipaase cha shoka mohou jaraamrutee |   
Yugashah praanadhee deha dharmaah te hi shat oormayah || iti |   
Aatmajayah mano niyamah | Atretikaranam drashtavyam | Eshaa   
brahma vishayaa matih |*** *Aatma jaya * is told as controlling the mind. *Urmi shatkas* are hunger \( *ashanaaya*\), thirst \( *pipaasaa*\), grief \( *shoka*\), delusion \( *moha*\), old age \( *jaraa*\) and death \( *mrutyu*\). Of these each pair in order \( *yugashah*\) are the attributes of *prana*, body \( *deha*\) and mind \( *dheeh*\). Hunger and thirst are related to *prana*, *shoka * and *moha * are related to mind and *jaraa * and *mrutyu *are related to body. *Aatmajaya * told here is controlling the mind and *matireshaa hrutaa * means the knowledge of *Brahman * was lost. *Atra itikaranam drashtavyam – itikartavya * means ordained duties attached to it. These are the necessary accessories to *brahma vidya*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 38:   
Vrataani vedavedyaapti kaaranaani akhilaani cha |   
Naraka graama maargena sangena apahrutaani me || ***The Brahman who is known from the *Vedaas*, to realize that Brahman, whatever *vrataas * have to be performed, all those things, I who am going on the path to hell, because of attachment, they are all destroyed. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vrataani iti | Veda vedyam brahma, tat aapti kaaranaani | ****Vrataani vedavedyaaptikaaranaani apahrutaani* – means the *vratas *necessary to attain *Brahman * who is known from the *Vedas * is lost for me. ***   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 39:   
Vinindyettham sa dharmajnyah svayam aatmaanam aatmanaa |   
Taam apsarasam aaseenaam idam vachanam abraveet ||*** Despising himself thus, he told that *apsaras * thus.  [[508]] ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vinindyeti | Aatmanaa manasaa |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 40:   
Gaccha paape yathaa kaamam yat kaaryam tat krutam tvayaa |   
Devaraajasya mat kshobham kurvantyaa bhaava cheshtitaih ||*** O bad woman, go away as you desire. Whatever *Indra, Devaraaja * had sent you to do, that you have done, you have done your duty. With all your charms, you have attracted me and destroyed my tapas. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Gaccha iti | Bhaava cheshtitaih bhaavaakhyaih cheshtitaih   
vilaasaadyaih | ****Bhava cheshtitaih * means through your fascinations ***   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 41:   
Na tvaam karomi aham bhasma krodha teevrena vanhinaa |   
Sataam saptapadam maitram ushito aham tvayaa saha ||*** I am not going to burn you to ashes with the fire of my great anger. For *sajjanaas*, one following seven steps will become friend. I have lived with you for many hundreds of years. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na iti | Sapta padaani saha gacchataam sataam maitram, kim punah   
chirakaalam tvayaa sahoshitasya me | ***When following a *sajjana* for mere seven steps is enough to cause friendship, what to say of spending a long time with you. ***   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 42:   
Athavaa tava ko doshah kim vaa kupyaami aham tava |   
Mamaiva dosho atitaraam yena aham ajitendriyah ||*** Or, what is your fault in this? Why should I get angry with you? It is all my fault only that I am not controlling my senses. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 43: *** [[509]] ***Yayaa shakra priyaarthinyaa kruto me tapaso vyayah |   
Tvayaa dhik tvaam mahaa moham manjushaam sujugupsitaam || ***In order to please *Indra*, you destroyed my *tapas*. You are like a box of great delusion. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 44:   
Soma uvaacha -   
Yaavat ittham sa viprarshih taam braveeti sumadhyamaam |   
Taavat galat svedajalaa saa babhoova ati vepathuh ||*** *Soma * said - As *Kandu Maharshi * started to show his anger, and was telling like this, she started shivering all over, and had drops of perspiration all over her body. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yayaa iti | Moha manjooshaam mohana panjaram | Moha bhaajana   
bhootaam jugupsitaam tvaam dhik iti anvayah | ****Moha Manjooshaa * means a cage or box of delusion. Fie upon you, disgusting being the cause of delusion. ***   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 45:   
Pravepamaanaam sa tadaa khinna gaatra lataam sateem |   
Gaccha gaccha iti sakrodham uvaacha munisattamah ||*** She was trembling with fear, and was perspiring all over. The *rishi * with great anger, said 'Go away, go away'. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 46:   
Saa tu nirbhartsitaa tena vinishkramya tat aashramaat |   
Aakaasha gaaminee svedam mamaarja taru pallavaih ||*** Being sent off like that, she went out of the hermitage. She started to go on her way to *Deva Loka*. She wiped her sweat with leaves of the plants. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 47:   
Vrukshaat vruksham yayou baalaa tat agra aruna pallavaih |   
Nirmaarjamaanaa gaatraani galat svedajalaani vai ||*** She went from tree to tree, plant to plant, wiping all her sweat with the leaves of those plants.  [[510]] 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 48:   
Rishinaa yah tadaa garbhah tasyaa dehe samaahitah |   
Nirjagaama sa romaanchah svedaroopee tat angatah || ***The child which was in her womb, from *Kandu Maharshi*, came out in the form of drops of sweat from her body. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 49:   
Tam vrukshaa jagruhuh garbham ekam chakre to maarutah |   
Mayaa chaapyaayito gobhih sa tadaa vavrudhe shanaih ||*** All the trees got hold of her drops of perspiration, which was having her child, and wind brought everything together and made it one. I with my rays nurtured that child, and that child grew up slowly. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 50:   
Vrukshaagra garbha sambhootaa marishaakhyaa varaananaa |   
Taam pradaasyanti vo vrukshaah kopa esha prashaamyataam || ***Born of the buds of the plants, and she is this excellent woman called *Maarishaa*, and that *Maarishaa*, the trees are going to give you, so please control your anger - *Soma * tells the *Prachetasaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vrukshaa iti | Vrukshaanaam agram pallavaani sa eva garbhah | ****Vrukshaagra* means the tip of trees which is the sprouting leaves. ***   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 51:   
Kandorapatyamevam saa vrukshebhyah cha samudgataa |   
Mamaapatyam tathaa vaayoh pramlochaa tanayaa cha saa || ***She is the daughter of *Kandu Maharshi*, she was also grown by the trees. She is the daughter of *Pramlochaa * and also of me, and also *Vaayu*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 52:   
Sa chaapi bhagavaan kanduh ksheene tapasi sattamah |   
Purushottammaakhyaatam vishnoraayatanam yayou ||*** That *Kandu*, when all his *tapas * got destroyed, went to *Vishnu's * abode called *Purushottama*.  [[511]] ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha maarishaa janma anupayuktam api prasangaat sva dushkruta   
praayaschittaadi roopam bhagavat stotraadikam kandu charita   
shesham aakhyaati sa chaapi iti |*** Though what is going to come next is how *Bhagavaan * also appeared in front of *Kandu*, how he did *tapas*, and eulogized *Bhagavaan*, with the wonderful *Vishnu Stotra*, though not directly related to *Maarishaa's janma*, as a form of *prayischitta * for all the *dushkrutaas * done, this is going to be told now. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 53:   
Tatra ekaagramatih bhootvaa chakaara aaraadhanam hareh |   
Brahma paaramayam kurvan japam ekaagra maanasah |   
Oordhva baahuh mahaa yogee sthitvaa asou bhoopa nandanaah ||*** He focussed on *Paramaatman*, did *Vishnu's aaraadhana * there, doing *japa * on *Parabrahman's svaroopa*, he, with concentrated mind on *Paramaatman*, did *tapas*. Having raised his arms, this great *yogi*, in standing posture, did *tapas * on *Paramaatman, Vishnu*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tatra iti | Brahma paaramyam brahma paara svaroopam | ***





*Soma * is telling this story of *Kandu Maharshi * to *Prachetasaas*. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 54:   
Prachetasa oochuh -   
Brahmapaaram muneh shrotum icchaamah paramam svatam |   
Japataa kandunaa devo yenaaraadhyata keshavah ||*** *Prachetasaas * said - *Prachetasaas * request *Soma * to tell the story of how he did the *tapas*, and how he eulogized *Paramaatman Keshava*, that great *stotra*, doing the *japa * of which he worshipped *Keshava*. 





Now, *Soma * tells about *Kandu Maharshi's Vishnu stotra*. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 55:   
Somah uvaacha -   
Paaram param vishnuh apaarapaarah parah parebhyah paramaartha *** [[512]] ***roopee |   
Sa brahma paarah para paara bhootah parah paraanaam api   
paarapaarah || ****Soma * said - See below commentary. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Paaram param iti | Paaram param samsaaraadhvanah param paaram   
antah \* So adhvanah paaramaameti \* yamadhvanah paaram ushanti   
yoginah \* iti shruti puraanaabhyaam | Yat vaa paramparayaa guru   
sampradaayaa avicchedena upadeshyam rahasyam vastu; yathaa   
cchaandogye \* Tadvaitad brahmaa prajaapataya uvaacha prajaapatih   
manave manuh prajaabhyah \* iti; \* Evam paramparaa praaptam imam   
viduh \* iti cha | Apaara paarah paara teera karma samaaptou iti   
dhaatoh \* yat vaktum naiva paaryata ityaadou shakyaarthe prayoga   
darshanaat lakshanayaa paarah shaktih, apaara paarah ananta shaktih   
ityarthah; \* Paraasya shaktih vividhaiva shrooyate \* ityaadi shruteh |   
Yadvaa paaram yasya naasti so apaarapaarah; aparimita parimaana   
itivat nirdeshah | \* Na te vishno jaayamaano na jaato deva mahimnah   
paramantamaapa \* iti shruteh | Athavaa apaarasya asamaaptasya   
apoornasya yajnyaadi karmanah paarah sva keertana smaranaadinaa   
paarayitaa samaapakah poorako vaa | \* Vishnurvai yajnyasya   
durishtam paati ityaadi \* viduh krushnam braahmanaah tattvato ye   
teshaam raajan sarva yajnyaah samaaptaah \* Sarvam karoti nischidram   
naama sankeertanam tava \* ityaadi vaa | Parah parebhyah kaaranatva   
niratishaya aanandatva aadinaa parebhyah brahmaadibhyah parah |   
Paramaartha roopee brahmaadivat na vinaashi vigrahah, api tu sarva   
shakti aashraya paramaartha divya vigrahah, parama prayojana   
aananda svaroopo vaa | Brahma paarah brahmanah pradhaanasya,   
paarah avasaana bhoomih | Aarsho linga vyatyayah | Yat vaa sa   
brahma paarah sa brahmanah sa vedaan vaidikaan paalayati iti sa   
brahma paarah | Ralayoramedah | Para paara bhootah pradhaana   
apekshayaa paarah samashti purushah, tasya paara bhootah, \*   
Pradhaana pumsoh ajayoh kaaranam \* ubhou etou leeyete   
paramaatmani iti cha darshanaat | Yat vaa pareshaam paraspara   
bhinnaanaam vastoonaam paara bhootah asankarakrut maryaada   
bhootah \* Esha seturvidhaarana iti shruteh | Parah paraanaam *** [[513]] ***parebhyo nitya muktebhyah jagat yonitva sheshitvaadibhyah parah |   
Paara paarah sarva paara bhootah kaalah tasya api paarah avasaana   
bhoomih \* Kaalam sa pachata iti | Yat vaa paaraanaam poorakaanaam   
vyomaadi vibhu dravyaanaam, paarah poorayitaa | Pruupaalana   
pooranayoh iti dhaatornijantaat pachaadyat cha | \* Tena idam   
poornam purushena sarvam iti | Athavaa paalaanaam paalah   
ralayoramedah \* Esha hi idam sarvam gopaayati iti \* Na hi paalana   
saamarthyamrute sarveshvaram harim \* iti cha | ****Paaram param* means the end of the path of *samsaara*. End of *samsaara * is *Vishnu's Parama Pada*, one who does *upaasanaa * reaches that *Parama Pada. Bhagavaan * is in *Parama Pada*, and He is also said to be *Parama Pada*. One who is on the other end of *samsaara*, one who crosses over *samsaara * reaches Him. *Bhagavan * is also the means to cross over the *samsara*. In the unbroken tradition of *Guru * and *Shishya*, that secret *upadesha * is taught, this is told in *Chaandogya*, how it is passed on from *aachaarya * to *shishya*, in the unbroken tradition of *aachaarya shishya **paramparaa*, that can also be taken as meaning of *Paaram param. Bhagavad **Geetha pramaana * is also given here - where *Krishna * says to *Arjuna * that whatever *yoga * He is teaching him is taught in the *guru shishya paramparaa. **Apaara paara * is explained as unending powers - *Vishnu * has got *ananta **shakti*, that which cannot be told fully; this is told in *Upanishads * in many ways; His *paraa shakti * is manifold, it is natural to Him; He is *sarva shakta, **ananta shakta*. There is no end to Him. He is of incomparable proportion. He is *sarva vyaapta, vibhu*. Nobody can know Your greatness, He is *vibhu **svaroopa*, and He is *gunatah bruhatvam, svaroopatah **bruhatvam. * Or, *yajnya * and other *karmaas*, when they are not yet completed, He makes it complete when one does His *keertana*, or *smarana*, this is also the meaning of *apaara paarah*. Those *braahmanaas * who realize *Krishna * as He is, all their *yajynaas * are as good as completed. Just Your *naama sankeertana * will make everything fulfilled. He is superior to *Brahma * and others in the aspects of He is the single cause of everything, He is *upaadaana kaarana, nimitta kaarana, sarva kaarana, eka kaarana * of the entire *jagat, Chaturmukha Brahma * and others are created by Him, they are all *srujyaas*, and He is *srashta*, His *svaroopa * is *niratishaya aananda. **Paramaartha roopee * is told as He is not like *Brahma * and others, who also have a limited life span, *Brahma's * life is a hundred years, and after that he  [[514]] also gets merged into his *kaarana*, everything gets merged into *Paramaatman * in *praakruta pralaya * and again they are all created; though *chetanaas * are all *nitya*, eternal, they are born again and again as they are *karma vashyaas*. Up to *Chaturmukha Brahma*, everyone's lifespan is limited. *Paramaatman * has divine auspicious *divya mangala vigraha*, which is eternal unlike *Chaturmukha Brahma * and others. This *divya mangala **vigraha * is the abode of *sarva shakti*, all powers, it is real and auspicious and eternal. Those who attain Him, they enjoy the bliss of communion with Him, this is *parama purushaartha * for all. *Brahma paarah *- here, the meaning of word *Brahma * is *prakruti, pradhaana*, matter. The word *brahma * is used in many senses even in the *Shrutis * and *Smrutis*. He is the ultimate, the end of *pradhaana*, that is, that *pradhaana * also merges into Him during *pralaya*. Or it can also be taken as that the *vaidikaas * who have mastered the *Vedaas*, He nurtures, looks after, protects them. Meaning of *para * is the *samashti **purusha*, the collectivity of all the sentients; during *pralaya*, all sentients are merged into *avyakta. Avyaktam akshare leeyate, aksharam tamasi **leeyate*. In a form which cannot be differentiated as to what is *pradhaana*, what is *chetana*, they go and stay with *Paramaatman*, as though with *ekee **bhaava*. How can be *chetanaas * be told as *para*, means with respect to *avyakta*, they can be told as *para*, they are superior to the *avyakta*. He is the cause of *pradhaana * and *chetanaas*; both of them go and merge into *Paramaatman*, they go and stay one with Him. *Samashti purushaas * also go and join unto *Paramaatman*. He is the One who is the abode of even that during *pralaya*, everything merges unto Him. Or, one more meaning can be told as all those objects which are mutually different, they don't get mixed up, there are innumerable *chetanaas*, and every *chetana * when created will have its own body, whether it is *keeta, manushya, deva, gandharva, **yaksha, * the individual *karmaas * are all maintained, and there is no mixing up of anybody's karma with anybody else; this is called *asaankarya*. For mutually different objects, He maintains their *svabhaava, svaroopa*, separately without any two getting mixed up. He is also superior to *nityaas * and *muktaas*, because He is the cause of the entire world, and *nityaas * and *muktaas * cannot create, and cannot involve in *srushti*; in those aspects, *Bhagavaan * is superior to them, and also He is the master of all, and everything is *shesha bhoota * to Him. *Paara paarah *- first word *paara * means *kaala*, He is the resting place, or controller of *kaala * also;  [[515]] everything is resting in Him, and He is ultimate, where all realities go and stay with Him, being supported by Him, and controlled by Him. *Kaala * is the controller of everything in this *prakruti **mandala. Kaala * has no control in *Parama Pada*, where *Paramaatman * controls everything there. He is also the fulfiller of even *vyoma * and others, *vyoma * is said to be *vibhu, aakaasha*, He is *antaryaami * of *aakaasha * also; where *aakaasha * does not exist, He exists; He is *vibhu*. Everything is filled with *Paramaatman * only. He is also the protector of the protectors. But for *Hari*, who is all protector, nobody else can protect. Without His *sankalpa*, nobody can even protect anyone else. 



In this one *shloka, Kandu Maharshi * eulogizes *Paramaatman * as superior to everything else, *svetara samasta vilakshana*, He is *Parama Sheshi*. Starting with everything, *avyakta, pradhaana, samashti purushaas, muktaas, **nityaas, kaala, aakaasha*, everything is controlled by Him, and everything rests in Him. He is the sole creator of this entire world. He is superior to *Chaturmukha Brahma * and others. 



***Recap***: In the previous session, we had studied about how *Maitreyar * asks two doubts to *Paraasharar*, when he started to talk about *Daksha. **Daksha * was born to *Prachetasaas*, and earlier was also born to *Brahma * of his right thumb which was in a different *manvantara * the *Swaayambhuva **Manvantara*; now it is *Chaakshusha Manvantara *- this is how *Paraasharar * clarified that doubt. Then *Maarishaa * the daughter of *Soma*, and *Daksha * is the grandson. It is told that *Soma * marries *Daksha's * daughter. This seems like there are some inconsistencies here. All these are clarified by *Paraasharar*, as during those times, there was no concept of elder and younger for *rishis * and *devaas*, they were all very exalted and had lot of knowledge, they used to live for a long time; elder or younger was decided based on the knowledge they had and their superior powers. *Daksha * and others are born again and again, in every *yuga * and *manvantara*. Like this, all the doubts are clarified. Now, *Maitreyar * asks *Paraasharar * about *Daksha's **srushti*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 85:   
Maitreyah - *** [[516]] ***Devaanaam daanavaanaam cha gandharva uraga rakshasaam |   
Utpattim vistarena iha mama brahman prakeertaya || ****Maitreyar * asks how *Daksha * created the *devaas, daanavaas, gandharvaas, **uragaas, raakshasaas*, etc. *Maitreyar * is asking that he wants to know in detail. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 86:   
Sri Paraasharah -   
Prajaa srujeti vyaadishtah poorvam dakshah svayambhuvaa |   
Yathaa sasarja bhootaani tathaa shrunu mahaamune ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- As per the order of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, he created people and expanded the mankind. How he created beings, listen to me, O great sage. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 87:   
Maanasaani eva bhootaani poorvam daksho asrujat tadaa |   
Devaan rusheen sa gandharvaan asuraan pannagaan tathaa || ***First *Daksha * created the *maanasa putraas*, from his *sankalpa * itself - *devaas, **rishis, gandharvaas, asuraas, pannagaas*, various classes. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 88:   
Yadaa sa srujamaanasya na vyavardhanta taah prajaah |   
Tatah sanchintya sa punah srushti hetoh prajaapatih ||*** When he created, through *sankalpa*, these *devaas, rishis, gandharvaas*, etc., they did not further expand their kind. Again he wanted to create, so he started to think. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 89:   
Maithunena eva dharmena sisrukshuh vivhdhaah prajaah |   
Asiknim upayeme atha veeranasya prajaapateh |   
Sutaam sutapasaa yuktaam mahateem loka dhaarineem ||*** He wanted to create through union. *Prajaapati Veerana's * daughter, *Asikni *- he married her. *Asikni * was endowed with great *tapas*, and was support of the whole world. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 90: *** [[517]] ***Atha putra sahasraani vairunyaam pancha veeryavaan |   
Asiknyaam janayaamaasa sarga hetoh prajaapatih ||*** *Daksha Prajaapati*, in order to create and expand mankind, in *Asikni, **Veerana's * daughter, he had 5000 sons. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 91:   
Taan drushtvaa naarado vipra samvivardhayishoon prajaah |   
Sangamya priya samvaado devarshih idam abraveet ||*** Now, *Naarada * sees these five thousand children, sons of *Daksha Prajaapati*; they were all interested in procreating more. He went to them and in kind words told them thus. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 92:   
He haryashvaa mahaaveeryaah prajaa yooyam karishyatha |   
Eedrusho drushyate yatno bhavataam shrooyataam idam ||*** They were called *Haryashvaas*. He said - O *Haryashvaas * of great valour, you want to create more, I see that you are getting engaged in procreation, do listen to me now. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 93:   
Baalishaa bata yooyam ye naasyaa jaaneetha vai bhuvah |   
Antah oordhvam adhah cha eva katham srakshyatha vai prajaah || ***You seem to very childish, because you don't know what is there above or below, what is inside this earth; you don't know anything about this earth, how do you create? 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 94:   
Oordhvam tiryak adhah cha eva yadaa apratihataa gatih |   
Tadaa kasmaat bhuvo na antam sarve drakshyatha baalishaah || ***When you can go, you are unstoppable, and you are capable of going above, below, everywhere, why are you not going to see the ends of the world? You seem to be now knowledgeable, you are childish. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Oordhvam iti | Yathaa pratihata gatih iti atra apratihata iti   
padacchedah | *** [[518]] ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 95:   
Te tu tat vachanam shrutvaa prayaataah sarvato disham |   
Adyaapi no nivartante samudrebhya ivaapagaah || ***They listened to *Naarada's * words, and thought that what *Naarada * is telling is right. We should go and see what is there above and below the earth, and find out and then only we should create. They went all around in all directions, and till now they have not returned, just like rivers which go and join the ocean, never come back. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 96:   
Haryashveshu atha nashteshu dakshah praachetasah punah |   
Vairunyaam atha putraanaam sahasram asrujat prabhuh ||*** When the *Haryashvaas * were lost, *Praachetasaas*' son *Daksha*, created another thousand children, in *Vairuni*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 97:   
Vivardhayishavaste tu shabalaashvaah prajaah punah |   
Poorvoktam vachanam brahman naaraadena eva noditaah ||*** They were called *Shabalaashvaas*. Again *Naarada * approaches them and tells them the same thing - without knowing the end of the world, why are you engaged in this creation? You seem to be very childish. You are not knowledgeable. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 98:   
Anyonyam oochuh te sarve samyak aaha mahaamunih |   
Bhraatruunaam padavee cha eva gantavyaa na atra samshayah ||*** The *Shabalaashvaas * told each other that what *Naarada * is telling is correct, we should also follow our brothers, who went all around to know the ends of the earth. There is no doubt about this. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 99:   
Jnyaatvaa pramaanam pruthivyaah cha prajaah srakshyaamahe tatah |   
Te api tena eva maargena prayaataa sarvatomukham |   
Adyaapi na nivartante samudrebhya ivaapagaah ||*** Let us know the limits of the earth, and then let us create more people.  [[519]] They also went just like their brothers, all around in all directions. They also have not returned till now, just as the rivers which go and join the oceans never come back. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 100:   
Tatah prabhruti vai bhraataa bhraatuh anveshane dvija |   
Prayaato nashyati tathaa tat na kaaryam vijaanataa || ****Paraasharar * is giving an advice here. From that time onwards, a person who goes searching after his lost brothers never returns. One who is knowledgeable should not go searching for a brother who is lost; he will also be lost. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 101:   
Taan cha api nashtaan vijnyaaya putraan dakshah prajaapatih |   
Krodham chakre mahaabhaago naaradam tam shashapa cha || ***Knowing that even *Shabalaashvaas * were lost just like *Haryashvaas, Daksha **Prajaapati * became very angry with *Naarada*, and cursed him. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Taan iti | Naarada shaape vaayuh \* Shabalaashveshu nashteshu   
dakshah kruddho ashapat dvijam | Naaradam naashameheeti garbha   
vaasam vaseti cha | Tadaa dakshassutaam praadaat priyaam vai   
parameshtine | Tasmaat sa naarado jajnye bhooya shaapa bhayaat   
rishih \* iti || ****Vaayu Puraana * tells like this - *Daksha Prajaapati * on seeing that even *Shabalaashvaas * were also lost, he cursed *Naarada * that 'Be born again in the womb, be born on this earth'. Then *Daksha * gave his daughter *Priyaa * to *Parameshti, Naarada * was born as the son of *Parameshti * and *Priyaa*, because of the curse. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 102:   
Sarga kaamah tato vidvaan sa maitreya prajaapatih |   


Shashtim daksho asrujat kanyaah vairunyaamiti na shrutam ||*** Being interested in creation again, *Daksha Prajaapati * created 60 daughters, in *Vairuni*, is what I have heard, says *Paraasharar*. *** *** [[520]] *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 103:   
Dadou sa dasha dharmaaya kaashyapaaya trayodasha |   
Sapta vimshati somaaya chatasro arishtanemine ||*** Out of these 60 daughters, he gave 10 daughters in marriage to *Dharma*, and 13 daughters to *Kaashyapa*. He gave 27 daughters in marriage to *Soma*, and 4 daughters to *Arishtanemi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dadou iti | Daakshaayaneenaam samjynaa vamsho vistarena vaktum   
dadou iti anuvaadah | Satavimshati iti supo luk | ***He will tell how they expanded. And also their names. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 104:   
Dve cha eva bahuputraaya dve cha eva aangeerase tatha |   
Dve krushaashvaaya vidushe taasaam naamaani me shrunu || ***He gave 2 daughters in marriage to *Bahuputra*, 2 to *Aangirasa*, 2 he gave to *Krushaashva*. I will tell you their names, listen to me. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 105:   
Arundhatee vasurjaamee langhaa bhaanuh marudvatee |   
Sankalpaa cha muhurtaa cha saadhyaa vishva cha taadrushee |   
Dharma patnyo dasha tu etaah taasvapatyaani me shrunu ||*** *Dharma's * wives names are being told here. He gave 10 daughters, *Arundathi, Vasu, Jamee, Langhaa, Bhaanu, Marudvati, **Sankalpaa, Muhoortaa, Saadhyaa * and *Vishvaa*. The children which they had - listen to me. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Arundhatee iti | Etaa arundhatyaadyaah praachetasasya dakshasya   
sutaah dasha dharmapatnayah, poorvoktaah shradhaadyaah   
trayodasha tu svaayambhuvasya dakshasya iti avirodhah | ****Arundathi, Vasu, Jaamee, Langhaa, Bhaanu, Marudvati*, etc. - are all told, are *Dakshaa's * daughters given in marriage to *Dharma*. Earlier also it was told that *Dakshaa's * 13 daughters were given in marriage to *Dharma*, that is in another *Manvantara*, the *Svaayambhuva Manvantara*; so there is no contradiction.  [[521]] ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 106:   
Vishve devaah tu vishvaayaah saadhyaah saadhyanajanaayata |   
Marudvatyaam marudvanto vasoh cha vasavah smrutaah |   
Muhoortaah tu muhoortaayaam jaataa bhaanoh tu bhaanavah ||*** *Vishvaa's * sons were called as *Vishve Devaas. Saadhyaa * gave birth to *Saadhya **Devaas*, called *Saadhyaas. Marudvati g* ave birth to *Marudvaans*. *Vasu's * children were called *Vasus - ashta Vasus. **Muhoortaa * gave birth to *Muhoortaas. Bhaanu * gave birth to *Bhaanus, **Aadityaas*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 107:   
Langhaayaah tu suto ghosho nagaveethee tu jaamijaa ||*** *Langhaa's * son was *Ghosha, Jaamee * gave birth to *Naagaveethi*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Langhaayaa iti | Naagaveethih devayaana uttara veethih |*** *Naagaveethi * is also the name for the North Street, the *Devayaana*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 108:   
Pruthivee vishayam sarvam arundhatyaam ajaayata |   
Sankalpaayaah tu sarvaatmaa jajnye sankalpa eva hi ||*** Everything related to *Pruthivi * was born from *Arundathi*. From *Sankalpaa * was born the one who controls everything, the *Sankalpa * itself. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 109:   
Ye tu aneka vasupraanaa devaa jyotih purogamaah |   
Vasavo ashtou samaakhyaataah teshaam vakshyaami vistaram ||*** They are all children of *Dharma * through his 10 wives. Those whose strength are the wealth, powerful rays, they are called as *Vasus*, I am going to tell you about them. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Eteshaam dharma putraanaam madhye vasu putraah aapaadayo ashtou   
trayah trimshat devaah antahpaatitvena prasiddhaah iti aaha - ye tu iti *** [[522]] ***| Aneka vasu praanaah anekam vasu dhanam rashmih vaa praano balam   
yeshaam te | Jyotih purogamaah agni mukhyaah \* Vasoonaam asmi   
paavakah \* iti smruteh |*** In *Bhagavad Gita * it is told - Among the *Vasus*, I am *Paavaka*, there is a *Vasu * called *Paavaka*. There are 8 *Vasus*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 110:   
Aapo dhruvah cha somah cha dharmah cha eva anilo analah |   
Pratyooshah cha prabhaasah cha vasavo naamabhih smrutaah ||*** Their names are *Aapa, Dhruva, Soma, Dharma, Anila, Anala, Pratyoosha, **Prabhaasa*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 111:   
Aapasya putro vai stabdhah shramah shaanto dhunih tathaa |   
Dhruvasya putro bhagavaan kalo loka prakalaanah || *** *Aapa * had 4 children, *Stabdha, Shrama, Shaanta, Dhuni. Dhruva's * son was *Kaala*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 112:   
Somasya bhagavaan varcho varchasvee yena jaayate ||*** *Soma's * son was *Varchas*, and because of him one becomes a *Varchasvi*, one who has an aura around him. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Somasya iti | Yena varchasaa jano varchasvee jaayate sa varcho   
adhidaivatam | ***He is *adhi devataa * for that *Varchas*; people who are knowledgeable have *varchas * around them. 



In *Upanishads*, it is said that "Your face is radiating your knowledge of *Brahma Vidyaa*". ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 113:   
Dharmasya putro dravino hutahavyavah tathaa |   
Manoharaayaam shishirah praano atha ramanah tathaa ||*** *Dharma * through his wife *Manoharaa*, had *Dravina, Hutahavyava, Shishira, * [[523]] *Praana * and *Ramana*. There is one more way of splitting -*Huta * and *Havyavah*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dharmasya iti | Manoharaayaam dharmaat iti sheshah |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 114:   
Anilasya shivaa bhaaryaa tasyaah putro purojavah |   
Avijnyaatagatih cha eva dvou putrou anilasya tu ||*** *Anila's * wife was *Shivaa*, and her sons were *Purojava * and *Avijnyaatagati*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 115:   
Agni putrah kumaarah tu sharastambe vyajaayata |   
Tasya shaakhaa vishaakhascha naigameyah cha prushtajaah || ****Agni Putra * was *Agni's * son earlier, he was born in *Shatastambha. Shaakha, **Vishaakha, Naigameya * are the younger brothers of *Kumaara*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Agni putrah iti | Agni putrah poorvam agneh putrah | Yat vaa agni   
putrah kumaarah tasya kumaarasya indraahata prushta deshaat jaato   
naigameyah, shaakhaa vishaakhou skanda srushtou |*** Or also, *Agni's * son is *Kumaara, Naigameya * was born of the back portion of *Kumaara*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 116:   
Apatyam kruttikaanaam tu kaartikeya iti smrutah ||*** *Kruttikaa's * son is known to be *Kaartikeya*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 117:   
Pratyooshasya viduh putram rishim naamna atha devalam |   
Dvou putrou devalasya api kshamaavantou maneeshinou || ****Pratyooshaa's * son is *Devala Rishi. Devala * has two children who had a lot of tolerance and were very knowledgeable. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 118:   
Bruhaspateh tu bhaginee varastree brahmachaarinee | *** [[524]] ***Yogasidhaa jagat krutsnam asaktaa vicharayuta |   
Prabhaasasya tu saa bhaaryaa vasoonaam ashtamasya ha || ****Bruhaspati * had a sister, called *Varastree*, a *Brahmachaarini*, she had a lot of yogic powers. She was going around in the world with a lot of *virakti*, being dispassionate with everything. The eighth *Vasu * is *Prabhaasa. **Varastree * became the wife of *Prabhaasa*. 



In another translation, the name is told as *Yogasiddhaa*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bruhaspateh iti | Asaktaa viraktaa |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 119:   
Vishvakarmaa mahaabhaagah tasyaam jajnye prajaapatih |   
Kartaa shilpa sahasraanaam tridashaanaam cha vardhakih ||*** In her \( *Varastree*\), *Vishvakarmaa * was born. He had created thousands of sculptures, and was also the sculptor of all the gods. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vishva karma iti | Tasyaam vishva karmaa |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 120:   
Bhooshanaanaam cha sarveshaam kartaa shilpavataam varah |   
Yah sarveshaam vimaanaani devaadeenaam chakaara ha |   
Manushyaah cha upajeevanti yasya shilpam mahaatmanah ||*** He had also created all the ornaments of the gods, and excellent among the sculptors. He also created the vehicles for all the gods. And human beings make a living out of the art of sculpting, which is *Vishvakarma's * art. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 121:   
Ajaikapaat ahirbudhnyah tvashtaa rudrah cha veeryavaan |   
Tvashtuh cha api aatmajah putro vishvaroopo mahaatapaah ||*** *Ajaikapaat, Ahirbudhnya, Tvashtaa, Rudra*, were born through *Prabhaasa. **Tvashtu's * son was *Vishvaroopa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** [[525]] ***Ajaikapaat iti | Ajaikapaadaadi rudrah chatushkam cha tasyaam   
prabhaasa bhaaryaayaam eva jajnye | Vishvaroopaanto atra vasu   
santaanah | ***



*Vishvaroopa * being *Tvashtru's * son is told in the *Vedaas * also. *Tvashtru * is the son of *Vishvakarma*. 



The names comprising the lineage are told here. Now the *ekaadasha **Rudraas * are being told here. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 122:   
Harah cha bahuroopah cha tryambakascha aparaajitah |   
Vrushaakapih cha shambhuh cha kapardee raivatah tathaa ||   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 123:   
Mruga vyaadhah cha sharvah cha kapaalee cha mahaa mune |   
Ekaadasha ete kathitaa rudraah tribhuvaneshvaraah ||*** *Hara, Bahuroopa, Tryambaka, Aparaajita, Vrushaakapi, Shambhu, **Kapardee, Raivata, Mrugavyaadha, Sharva, Kapaalee*, are the eleven *Rudraas*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Evam rudra prasangaat praak uktaan brahma putraan neela   
lohitaamshaan rudraan hara aadi naamabhih nirdishati harah cha iti |   
Athavaa prabhaasa bhaarya soona vastrayo rudraah, tvashta soonavo   
ashtou tat anvaye parishishtaa rudraa iti |*** One interpretation is: In Chapter Eight, we saw the *Brahma * started to create the *Rudraas*, starting with *Neela Lohita*. These *Rudraas * are the *amsha * of *Neela Lohita * only. Their names are given as *Hara, Bahuroopa, **Tryambaka*, etc. Or, it can be told as: Through *Prabhaasa*, three *Rudraas * were born, *Anekapaada, Ahirbudhnya * and *Rudra. **Tvashtru's * eight sons were the remaining eight. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 124:   
Shatam tu ekam samaakhyaatam rudraanaam amita oujasaam |   
Kaashyapasya tu bhaaryaa yaah taasaam naamaani me shrunu | *** [[526]] ***Aditih ditih danuscha eva arishtaa cha surasaa kashaa ||*** These *Rudraas * had great *ojas*; they are told as hundred also, and one also. Now, listen to the names of the wives of *Kaashyapa. Aditi, Diti, Danu, **Arishtaa, Surasaa, Kashaa*, ... ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shatam tu ekam iti | Shatam tu evam iti cha paathah | Evam   
rudraanaam shatakam samaakhyaatam | Idam shatakam eeshvara   
srushtam iti kechit | Atra shata shabdo ananta vachanah |*** There is a *paatha antara - shatam * to *evam*. Whether *Rudra * is one or hundred is discussed in the *Poorva Meemaamsa*. For those *karmaas * where there is one *Rudra*, this is how it will be told. Where there are hundred *Rudraas*, this is how it will be told. *Rudraas * are innumerable, it is also told; out of this, eleven are prominent. 



***Aditih iti | Adityaadah kaashyapa striyah | Surasaa khasheti cha   
paathah |*** ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 125:   
Surabhih vanitaa cha eva taamraa krodhavashaa ilaa |   
Kadruh munischa dharmajnya tat apatyaani me shrunu |*** *... Surabhi, Vanitaa, Taamraa, Krodhavashaa, Ilaa, Kadru, Muni*, the 13 wives of *Kashyapa*. Now, listen about their children. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 126:   
Poorva manvantare shreshtaa dvaadashaa san surottamaah |   
Tushitaa naama te anyonyam oochuh vaivasvate antare ||*** In the earlier *Manvantara*, there were 12 gods, they were called *Tushitaas*, group of gods. In *Vaivasvata Manvantara*, they met and discussed like this. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Poorva iti | Poorva manvantare dviteeye svaarochisha manvantare ye   
tushitaanaama devaa aasan, te vaivasvate saptame manvantare | ***In the second *Manvantara * called *Svaarochisha Manvantara, Tushitaa * was the name of the group of gods. The same gods, in the sixth *Manvantara*, are talking like this.  [[527]] ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 127:   
Upasthite ati yashasah chaakshushasya antare manoh |   
Samavaayeekrutaa sarve samaagamya parasparam ||*** They came together in the *Chaakshusha Manvantara*, which is the 6th *Manvantara*, and spoke to each other like this. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Upasthita iti | Upasthite aasanne chaakshusasya shashtasya   
manvantare parasparam samaagamya samavaayeekrutaa anyonyam   
oochuh iti poorvena anvayah |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 128:   
Aagacchata drutam devaah aditim sampravishya vai |   
Manvantare prasooyaamah tannah shreyo bhavet iti ||*** They all mutually had a conversation that let us all get into the womb of *Aditi*, and be born in the *Vaivasvata Manvantara*, the seventh *Manvantara*, and it will do all good for us. 



*Tushitaa devaas*, who were in the *Svaarochisha Manvantara*, met in the *Chaakshusha Manvantara*, and said that in the next *Manvantara*, the *Vaivasvata Manvantara*, let us get into *Aditi's * womb and be born to here - it will be all good for us. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Katham oochuh iti aaha aagacchata iti | Manvantare saptame aditim   
sampravishya prasooyaamah tannah shreyah iti |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 129:   
Evam uktvaa to te sarve chaakshushasyaantare manoh |   
Maareechaat kaashyapaat jaataa adityaa daksha kanyayaa ||*** Having spoken thus in *Chaakshusha Manvantara, Kashyapa * who is the son of *Mareecha*, and *Kashyapa's * wife *Aditi*, who is daughter of *Daksha*, through her, they were born. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** [[528]] ***Etan nigamayati evam uktvaa iti |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 130:   
Tatra vishnuh cha shukrah cha jajnyaate punareva hi |   
Aryamaa cha eva dhaataa cha tvashtaa pooshaa tathaa eva cha ||*** Then, *Vishnu * and *Indra * were again born. In the same way, *Aryamaa, **Dhaataa, Tvashtru, Pooshaa*, were also born. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 131:   
Vivasvaan savitaa cha eva mitro varuna eva cha |   
Amshuh bhaga cha atitejaa aadityaa dvaadasha smrutaah ||*** Also *Vivasvaan, Savitaa, Mitra, Varuna*, were also born. *Amshu, Bhaga*, were all the 12 *Aadityaas*, who had great *tejas*. They were the *Dvaadasha **Aadityaas*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 132:   
Chaakshusya antare poorvam aasan ye tushitaah suraah |   
Vaivasvate antare te vai aadityaa dvaadasha smrutaah || ***Those gods known as *Tushitaas * in *Chaakshusha Manvantara*, in the *Vaivasvata Manvantara*, they only came to be known as *Dvaadasha **Aadityaas*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 133:   
Yaa sapta vimshati proktaah soma patnyo atha suvrataah |   
\(Sarvaa nakshatra yoginya stannaamnah cha eva taam smrutaah |\)   
Taasaam apatyaani abhavan deeptaani amita tejasaam ||*** It was told that *Daksha * gave 27 daughters to *Soma*. And they were all associated with *Nakshatraas, Ashvini, Bharani*, etc. They also had a lot of children who had a lot of *tejas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bhagavatah prati manvantaram prati yugam cha avataaram triteeye   
amshe vakshyati | Aditi vamshaat anantara praaptam api diti aadi   
vamsham prahlaada charita aadi vistara vivakshyaa ante vakshyan   
madhye svalpatvaat shishta daksha kanyaa vamsham aaha yaa sapta   
vimshati iti | *** [[529]] In the Third *Amsha * of *Vishnu Puraana, Bhagavaan's avataara * which happens in every *Manvantara * is going to be told. about *Soma's * wives and their children is going to be told here. Before *Soma's vamsha, Diti's vamsha * should have been told - after *Aditi's vamsha*, in order. *Diti vamsha * was not told because *Prahlaada charita * comes, which is going to be told in great detail; in order to tell it in great detail, it will not be told here. Whatever little was left regarding remaining of *Daksha kanyaas * will be concluded and then *Prahlaada charita * will be told. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 134:   
Arishta nemi patneenaam apatyaani iha shodasha ||*** Now, *Arishtanemi's * 16 children, through his wives, I am going to tell you that. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 135:   
Bahu putrasya vidushah chatasro vidyutah smrutaah || ***The knowledgeable *Bahuputra*, his four *Vidyuts * are known. Whether they are children or wives, different commentaries tell differently. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bahu putrasya iti | Chatasro vidyutah kapilaatirakta peeta sita   
varnaah | ****Kapilaa, Atirakta, Peeta, Sitavarna *- brown, dark red, yellow, white colours. *Gita * Press commentary tells them as wives, as *Kapilaa * is told as *Daksha kanyaa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 136:   
Pratyangirasajaa sreshtaah rucho brahmarshi satkrutaah || ***Now, born of *Pratyangiras*, the *Rig mantraas*, which are *shreshta mantraas*, well honoured, respected by *Brahmarishis*, are told. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Pratyangirasajaa iti | Pratyangirasah pratyangiraakhyaa ruchah \*   
yaam kalpayanti iti aadyaa trimshat mantraah | ***The *Rk mantraas * are called *Pratyangira mantraas*. There are thirty *mantraas * told. These are coming in *Atharva Veda*, in the  [[530]] first *sookta * of the 10th *Kaanda*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 137:   
\(Bhru\) Krushaashvasya tu devarsheh devapraharanaah smrutaah || ***From *Krushaashva*, the *abhimaani devataas * of the weapons of the *devaas * were born. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
\(Bhru\) Krushaashva iti | Praharanaah shastra devataah |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 138:   
Ete yugasahasraante jaayante punareva hi |   
Sarve devaganaah tatta trayah trimshat tu cchandajaah |   
Teshaam api iha satatam nirodho utpattih uchyate ||*** At the end of the *yuga*, they are again born. All the *deva ganaas * told - 33 in number, *Dvaadashaadityaas, Ekaadasha Rudraas, Ashta Vasus, Ashvini **Devataas * are told in one place, *Indra * and *Prajaapati * are told in another place; out of their own willing, they are born again and again, at the end of thousand *yugaas*, all the *deva ganaas*. Out of this, 33 are born of their own will. Their creation and destruction is also told - all the time it happens repeatedly. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ete iti | Svacchandajaah svecchayaa jaataah | Nirodhah cha utpattih   
cha nirodhotpattih |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 139:   
Yathaa sooryasya maitreya udayaastamayaaviha |   
Evam deva nikaayaah te sambhavanti yuge yuge ||*** Just like the rising and setting of the Sun happens everyday, in the same way, the host of *devaas * are also created again and again in every *yuga*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yathaa iti | Yuge yuge prati yugam kalpa manvantaraadi |*** In every *yuga, kalpa, manvantara*. 





 [[531]] Now, *Diti's vamsha * will be told briefly. In this there is a mention of *Prahlaada's * story. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 140:   
Dityaah putradvayam jajnye kaashyapaat iti na shrutam |   
Hiranyakashipuh cha eva hiranyaakshah cha durjayah ||*** *Paraasharar * says - I have heard that *Diti * had two sons from *Kaashyapa*. They were *Hiranyakashipu * and *Hiranyaaksha * whom nobody can win over in war. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 141:   
Simhikaa cha abhavat kanyaa viprachitteh parigrahah ||*** There was a daughter *Simhika * also, who married *Viprachitti*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 142:   
Hiranyakashipoh putraah chatvaarah prathitoujasah |   
Anuhlaadah cha hlaadah cha prahlaadah cha eva dharmavaan |   
Samhlaadah cha mahaaveeryaa daitya vamsha vivardhanaah ||*** *Hiranyakashipu * had four children, *Anuhlaada, Hlaada, Prahlaada * who was following dharma and a personification of *dharma, * and *Samhlaada*. They were very valiant. They expanded the *daitya vamsha*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 143:   
Teshaam madhye mahaabhaagah sarvatra samadruk vashee |   
Prahlaadah paramaam bhaktim ya uvaaha janaardane ||*** Among them, *Prahlaada * had and displayed great *bhakti * towards *Janaardana*, and was a very great person. He had an equal disposition towards everything and everyone around him. 



Briefly it is told here about *Prahlaada*, about *Hiranyakashipu*, his deeds, and how *Prahlaada * survived all that. We will see them in the next class. 



So far in this section, we saw the *Daksha kanya vamsha * in detail, the daughters of *Daksha*, their names, their *vamsha. Diti's vamsha * will be told now. *Prahlaada charitra * will be told in detail in future *adhyaayaas*. 





***Recap***: In the previous session, we had just started to study about *Diti's * [[532]] *vamsha*, which *Sri Paraasharar * is telling *Maitreyar*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 140:   
Dityaah putradvayam jajnye kaashyapaat iti na shrutam |   
Hiranyakashipuh cha eva hiranyaakshah cha durjayah ||*** *Paraasharar * says - *Diti * and *Kashyapa * had two sons, *Hiranyakashipu * and *Hiranyaaksha*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 141:   
Simhikaa cha abhavat kanyaa viprachitteh parigrahah ||*** They also had a daughter called *Simhikaa*, who married *Viprachitti*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 142:   
Hiranyakashipoh putraah chatvaarah prathitoujasah |   
Anuhlaadah cha hlaadah cha prahlaadah cha eva dharmavaan |   
Samhlaadah cha mahaaveeryaah daitya vamsha vivardhanaah ||*** *Hiranyakashipu * had four sons, who were very valiant, *Anuhlaada, Hlaada, **Prahlaada, Samhlaada*. Out of them, *Prahlaada * was the embodiment of dharma. They were all very courageous, and were the ones who expanded the *Daitya vamsha*. 





Now, *Prahlaada's * story is going to be told in detail. This starts to talk about the greatness of *Prahlaada*, the kind of devotion he had. *

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 143:   
Teshaam madhye mahaabhaagah sarvatra samadruk vashee |   
Prahlaadah paramaam bhaktim ya uvaaha janaardane ||*** Among the, *Prahlaada * was a great person, he was equi-poised, treating everyone equally, had all his senses under control, he expressed *parama **bhakti*, great devotion, towards *Janaardana*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 144:   
Daityendra deepito vanhih sarvaanga upachito dvija |   
Na dadaaha cha yam poorvam vaasudeve hrudi sthite ||*** *Prahlaada * was so much intent on meditation on *Vaasudeva*, his mind was completely filled with the thought of *Vaasudeva*. Even the king of the demons, *Hiranyakashipu*, though he had put him in fire, and the fire had  [[533]] engulfed his entire body, it never burnt even a small part of his body. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 145:   
Mahaarnavaantah salile sthitasya chalito mahee |   
Chachaala sakalaa yasya paashabaddhasya dheematah || ****Prahlaada * was tied with ropes, and thrown into the great ocean, under the waters. When he was immersed like that, being tied with ropes, he moved a little bit, and the entire world was shaken. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 146:   
Na bhinnam vividhaih shastraih yasya daityendra paatitaih |   
Shareeramadri kathinam sarvatra achyuta chetasah || ***Because of his deep devotion of *Achyuta*, his entire body and mind were filled with the thought of *Achyuta*, his body had become so hard, as a great mountain. Even though he was pierced with a lot of sharp weapons, they could not pierce his body, as it had become so hard, just like mountain. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 147:   
Visha analojjvala mukhaa yasya daitya prachoditaah |   
Na antaaya sarpa patayo babhoovu rurutejasah ||*** All the kings of serpents, throwing fire-like venom, being commanded by *Hiranyakashipu*, they could never do anything to *Prahlaada*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 148:   
Shailaih aakraanta dehaa api ya ssmaran purushottamam |   
Tatyaaja naatmanah praanaan vishnu smarana damshitah ||*** He was hit with rocks, because he was thinking of *Purushottama*, being protected by the shield of the thought of Vishnu, he was still very much alive. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 149:   
Patanta mucchaat avanih yamupetya mahaamatim |   
Dadhaara daitya patinaa kshiptam svarga nivaasinaa ||*** The king of demons, *Hiranyakashipu*, living in *swarga*, threw him from the top of the mountains, on to the earth. Though he was falling like that, the goddess *Pruthivi Devi*, held him and supported him; nothing happened to  [[534]] him. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 150:   
Yasya samshoshako vaayuh dehe daityendra yojitah |   
Avaapa samshayam sadhyah chittah te madhusoodhane || ***The winds which dry up anything, though commanded by *Hiranyakashipu*, could not do anything, and the *Vaayu * itself got dried up immediately, because *Madhusoodana * was in the thought of *Prahlaada*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 151:   
Vishaana bhangamunmattaa mada haanim cha diggajaah |   
Yasya vakshasthale praaptaa daityendra parinaamitaah ||*** The *diggajaas * were commanded to kill him with their huge and hard tusks, and they started to pierce his chest with their tusks. Their tusks themselves got broken, and all their energy got dried up. They could not do anything. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vishaanaa iti | Parinaamitaah dantaih hantum preritaah |   
   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 152:   
Yasya cha utpaaditaa krutyaa daitya raaja purohitaih |   
Babhoova naantaaya puraa govindaasakta chetasah || ***The *purohitaas * were asked to do some *aabhichaarika krutya*, they could not do any harm to him, because of his deep thought on *Govinda*. 



These *krutyaas * are told in *Vedas * and are used to destroy enemies etc. \(Why should Vedas each such *karmaas * is discussed in *Vedartha Sangraha *commentary by *Sri Sudarshana Suri*\). ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 153:   
Shambarasya cha maayaanaam sahasra mati maayinah |   
Yasmin prayuktam chakrena krishnasya vitatheekrutam ||*** He called *Shambaraasura * and asked him to use his *maayaa shakti*; he created thousands of wonderful illusions to hurt *Prahlaada*, but *Krishna's **Sudarshana Chakra * came and destroyed all the *maayaas * of *Shambaraasura*,  [[535]] and they all became futile. *Shambaraasura * could not touch him with his *maayaa*. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 154:   
Daityendra soodopahrutam yasya haalaahalam visham |   
Jaarayaamaasa matimaan avikaaram amatsari || ***He had no jealousy, and was the one endowed with great knowledge because of his deep meditation on Vishnu. The attendants of *Hiranyakashipu* gave him *haalaahala * poison, very powerful poison; *Prahlaada * digested all of them, without any *vikaara*. He had no reaction, and he simply digested the poison. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Daityendra iti | Haalaahalam visham | \* Nadee halahalaa naama   
tajjam haalaahalam visham \* iti aayurvede || ***There is a river called *Halahala*, and what is born from there is called *Haalaahala visha*. ***   


Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 155:   
Samachetaam jagati asmin yah sarveshu eva jantushu |   
Yathaa aatmani tathaa anyeshaam param maitra gunaanvitah ||*** In respect of all beings, he was equally positioned, in this world. With respect to others, he was disposed as though towards himself. He was very friendly with respect to everyone. 





*

**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 15, Shloka 156:   
Dharmaatmaa satya shouchaadi gunaanaam aakarah parah |   
Upamaanam asheshaanaam saadhoonaam yah sadaa abhavat || ***He was a *dharmaatmaa*, always following the path of *dharma*. He was the abode of all excellent qualities, *satya, shoucha*. He was *upamaana * for all the *saadhus*, all the time. All the *saadhus * were compared only with *Prahlaada*. 



*Paraasharar * talks about how *Prahlaada * was deeply immersed in the thought of *Vishnu*, and nothing could touch him or shake him. All the tricks that *Hiranyakashipu * tried on him failed.  [[536]] 



This concludes the Fifteenth Chapter. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Prathame Amshe Panchadasho Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Prathame   
Amshe Panchadasho Adhyaayah || ***



***|| Atha Shodhasho Adhyaayah ||*** 



Now, *Maitreyar * is curious to know about *Prahlaada*, and asks thus. *** ***
