+++
title = "16"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 1:    
Maitreyah -   
Kathito bhavataa vamsho maanavaanaam mahaatmanaam |   
Kaaranam cha asya jagato vishnuh eva sanaatanah ||*** *Maitreyar * says - O *Paraashara*, you told me about the great people of the *vamsha * of *Manu*. You also told me about the procreation and generations. What I understood is that you also told me that the ultimate cause of this universe is Vishnu only - He is the creator of this entire world. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kathita iti | Maanavaanaam svayambhuva manu vamshayaanaam   
uttaanapaadaadeenam | Kaaranam iti shaastra taatparya artha   
prashnottara smaaranam |*** What is told here is the *Svaayambhuva Manu's vamsha, Uttaanapaada * and others. The gist of this entire *shaastra * is the question and answer answered by *Paraasharar*, about who is the cause of this world, in the very beginning itself, this is being reminded here, *kaaranam cha asya jagatah *- He is the ultimate cause of this whole world. ***   


## 2
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 2:    
Yattatvetat bhagavaan aaha prahlaadam daitya sattamam |   
Dadaaha naagnih naastraih cha kshunnah tat tyaaja jeevitam ||*** You told me about *Prahlaada*, the great *daitya*, that even fire could not burn him, and that he could not be destroyed even by weapons, and so  [[537]] nothing happened to him. Nothing could take away his life. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Taadrushah saadhuh sva bandhubhih kim nimittam jighaamsita iti   
koutukacchalena vishnu bhakta charita shushrooshayaa prucchati   
yattatvetat iti | ****Maitreyar * is asking - he was such a great wise person, *Prahlaada*, why did his own relatives try to kill him? He was such a great devotee of *Vishnu*, I want to know about him. ***   


## 3
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 3:    
Jagaama vasudhaa kshobham yatra abdhi salile sthite |   
Paashaih baddhaih vichalati vikshipta angaih samaahataa ||*** You also told me that when he was tied with ropes and thrown into water, when he moved a little bit also, the entire world was disturbed and shook. ***   


## 4
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 4:    
Shailaih aakraanta deho api na mamaara cha yah puraa |   
Tvayaa cha ateeva maahaatmyam kathitam yasya dheematah ||*** Though he was thrown great rocks and stones, nothing happened to him. You told me the greatness of that intelligent one. 





## 5
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 5:    
Tasya prabhaavam atulam vishnoh bhaktimato mune |   
Shrotum icchaami yasya etat charitam deepta tejasah ||*** He was a great devotee of *Vishnu*, I want to know about his greatness. That *tejasvi Prahlaada*, I want to know about his story. ***   


## 6
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 6:    
Kim nimittam asou shastraih vikshipto ditijaih mune |   
Kimartham cha abdhi salile vikshipto dharma tatparah ||*** Why was he hit with weapons, why was he thrown in waters, by the *daityaas*. He was such an embodiment of *dharma * itself. ***   


## 7
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 7:    
Aakraantah parvataih kasmaat drashtah cha eva mahoragaih | *** [[538]] ***Kshiptah kim adri shikharaat kim vaa paavaka sanchaye ||*** Why was he thrown from the mountains, why were the serpents thrown at him to bite him? Why was he thrown in fire? 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 8:    
Digdantinaam danta bhaagaih sa cha kasmaat nipeeditah |   
Sanshoshiko anilascha asya prayuktah kim mahaasuraih ||*** Why were the *diggajaas * made to pierce him with their tusks? Why was the great *Vaayu*, which dries up everything, why was he commanded to torture him and dry him up? ***   


## 9
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 9:    
Krutyaam cha daitya guravo yuyujuh tatra kim mune |   
Shambarah cha api maayaanaam sahasram kim prayuktavaan ||*** The *daitya gurus*, why did they do this *aabhichaarika kriyaa*, to cause harm to him? Why did *Shambara * use all his *maaya * to destroy him? ***   


## 10
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 10:    
Haalaahalam visham ghoram daitya soodaih mahaatmanah |   
Kasmaat dattam vinaashaaya yat jeernam tena dheemataa ||*** Why did all the servants of *Hiranyakashipu * give all poison, in order to destroy him? Which he digested, and nothing happened to him. ***   


## 11
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 11:    
Etat sarvam mahaabhaaga prahlaadasya mahaatmanah |   
Charitam shrotum icchaami mahaa maahaatmya soochakam ||*** His greatness was so much that I would like to hear his story. That excellent one, the devotee of *Vishnu*. Please do tell me about his story. ***   


## 12
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 12:    
Na hi koutoohalam tatra yat daityena na hato hi sah |   
Ananya manaso vishnou kah samartho nipaatane ||*** I am not surprised that the *daityaas * could not kill him. When one is so much deeply meditating on *Vishnu*, who can kill such a person. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** [[539]] ***Na hi koutoohalam iti | Aascharya shravane hi koutoohalam | Idam tu   
vishnu bhaktasya paraih avadhyatvam na aascharyam |   
Mahaanubhaavasya bandhubhih peedane nimitta shushrooshaa vidyate   
|*** When *Maitreyar * says that he was not surprised; when something is rare which is heard, there will be surprise. A *Vishnu bhakta*, someone not being able to destroy him, there is nothing surprising. ***   


## 13
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 13:    
Tasmin dharmapare nityam keshava aaraadhanodyate |   
Sva vamsha prabhavaih daityaih kruto dvesho ati dushkarah ||*** He was following *dharma * all the time. He was always engaged in the worship of *Keshava*. His own close relatives had great hatred towards him. ***   


## 14
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 14:    
Dharmaatmani mahaabhaage vishnu bhakte vimatsare |   
Daiteyaih prahrutam kasmaat tat mama aakhyaatum arhasi ||*** He was a *dharmaatmaa*, he was without any jealousy. He was a great devotee of *Vishnu*. Why were all the *daityaas * trying to kill him like that, please let me know. ***   


## 15
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 15:    
Praharanti mahaatmaano vipakshe cha api nedrushe |   
Gunaih samanvite saadhou kim punah yah sva pakshajah ||*** Great and wise people don't do these kind of things even to their enemies. That being the case, his own relatives, when he was a very wise person, and he had all great qualities, why did they do like that to such a person? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Praharanti iti | Yah sva pakshajah tasmin iti sheshah |   
   


## 16
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 16, Shloka 16:    
Tat etat kathyataam sarvam vistaraat munipungava |   
Daiyeshvarasya charitam shrotum icchaami asheshatah || ***Please do tell me in detail about his story. I would like to hear the complete story of *Hiranyakashipu * and *Prahlaada*.  [[540]] ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tat iti | Charitam vruttam |*** 



This completes the Sixteenth Chapter. *Maitreyar * asks *Paraasharar *- you told me all these things about *Prahlaada*, why did such a thing happen? I want to know in great detail about this great devotee of *Vishnu*. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Prathame Amshe Shodhasho Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Sri Vishnu Chitteeye Prathame   
Amshe Shodhasho Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Atha Saptadasha Adhyaayah ||   
 ***
