+++
title = "17"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 1:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Maitreya shrooyataam samyak charitam tasya dheematah |   
Prahlaadasya sadodaara charitasya mahaatmanah ||*** *Sri Paraasharar * says - The most benevolent, great devotee, *Prahlaada*, please do listen to me, I will tell you his story. ***   


## 2
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 2:    
Diteh putro mahaa veeryo hiranyakashipuh puraa |   
Trailokyam vashyamaaninye brahmano varadarpitah ||*** *Diti's * son, *Hiranyakashipu*, was there long back, was very valourous. He became arrogant with the boons received from *Chaturmukha Brahma*. He started to bring under his control all the three worlds. ***   


## 3
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 3:    
Indratvam akarot daityah sa cha aaseet savitaa svayam |   
Vaayuh agnih apaam naathah somah cha abhoot mahaa asurah ||*** He himself became *Indra*, he himself became the Sun, *Vaayu, Agni*; he was the master of *Vaayu, Agni*, waters; he became the master of *Soma*. ***   


## 4
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 4:  *** [[541]] ***Dhanaanaam adhipah sa abhoot sa eva aaseet svayam yamah |   
Yajnya bhaagaan asheshaan tu sa svayam bubhuje asurah ||*** He became *Kubera * himself, he himself became *Yama*. All the gods were under his control, he captured all of them. He started to play the roles of all these gods himself. All the *havis * which was offered in the *yajnyaas * to these gods - he started to receive that *havis * himself. ***   


## 5
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 5:    
Devaah svargam parityajya tat traasaan munisattama |   
Vicheruh avanou sarve bibhraanaa maanusheem tanum ||*** Being terrified by his tortures, all the gods, left *svarga*, took over the bodies of humans, and started roaming around on earth. ***   


## 6
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 6:    
Jitvaa tribhuvanam sarvam trailokyaishvarya darpitah |   
Udgeeyamaano gandharvaih bubhuje vishayaan priyaan ||*** Having won over all the three worlds, becoming highly arrogant with the wealth and prosperity of the three worlds, he was being praised by *Gandharvaas*, he was enjoying all sensual pleasures. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 7:    
Paanaasaktam mahaatmaanam hiranyakashipum tadaa |   
Upaasaam chakrire sarve siddha gandharva pannagaah || ***He was always indulging in drinking; all *siddhaas, gandharvaas, **pannagaas * were doing *upaasanaa * on him only. They were only worshipping him. ***   


## 8
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 8:    
Avaadayan jaguh cha anye jaya shabdam tathaa apare |   
Daitya raajasya puratah chakruh siddhaah mudaanvitaah ||*** Others were playing all kinds of *vaadyaas*, some were singing praising songs, some were singing about his greatness. *Siddhaas * were praising and singing about him. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Avaadayan iti | Avaadayan vaadyaani | *** [[542]] ***   


## 9
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 9:    
Tatra pranruttaa apsarasi sphatikaabhramaye asurah |   
Papou paanam mudaa yuktah praasaade sumanohare ||*** All the *apsarases * were dancing to entertain him, in that crystal palace. The king of demons, *Hiranyakashipu * was always taking intoxicating drinks, in that great palace. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tatra iti | Abhram abhrakaakhyah shilaa visheshah | Yat vaa aakaasha   
gatvaada bhramayatvam | Sphatikaashma maya iti vaa paathah |   
   


## 10
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 10:    
Tasya putro mahaabhaagah prahlaado naama naamatah |   
Papaatha baala pathyaani guru geha gato arbhakah ||*** His son was the great *Prahlaada*, by name. Being a very small child, he went to the *guru's aashrama*, and learnt the lessons taught. ***   


## 11
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 11:    
Ekadaa tu sa dharmaatmaa jagaama gurunaa saha |   
Paanaasaktasya puratah pituh daitya pateh tadaa ||*** The king of demons, *Hiranyakashipu * was engaged in drinking. *Prahlaada * went in front of him with his gurus. ***   


## 12
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 12:    
Paada pranaamaavatanam tam utthaapya pitaa sutam |   
Hiranyakashipuh praaha prahlaadam amitoujasam ||*** He bowed down to his father, and touched his feet in respect. His father, *Hiranyakashipu * lifted him up, and told *Prahlaada * thus. ***   


## 13
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 13:    
Pathyataam bhavataa vatsa saara bhootam subhaashitam |   
Kaalenaitaavataa yat te sadaa udyuktena shikshitam ||*** O *Prahlaada*, tell me what is the essence of all the good things that you have learnt all this time. All the time, you were engaged in learning. Whatever you have learnt, tell me the most essential teachings.  [[543]] 





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 14:    
Prahlaadah -   
Shrooyataam taata vakshyaami saara bhootam tava aajnyayaa |   
Samaahita manaah bhootvaa yat me chetasi avasthitam || ****Prahlaada *- Being commanded by you, I am going to tell you the most essential teachings that I have learnt. Pay a lot of attention and listen to me. What is present in my mind, I am going to tell you. 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 15:    
Anaadimadhyaantam ajam avruddhikshayam achyutam |   
Pranato asmi anta santaanam sarva kaarana kaaranam || ***I bow down to that *Achyuta*, who does not have beginning, middle or end, who is unborn, who neither grows now deteriorates, I bow down to Him. This is the essential teaching that I have learnt. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Anaadi iti | Anaaditya aadi visheshanaih antavato vyaavruttih, ajam iti   
karma adheena janmanah purushaat | Antam samhaaram santanoti iti   
anta santaanah |*** He is not that which has an end; He does not have end or beginning. He is different and distinct from anything which has an end. He is unborn; He is different and distinct from *purusha * who is born due to karma. He is the one responsible for the dissolution of this world. He is even the cause of all causes. ***   


## 16
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 16:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Etat nishamya daityendrah sa kopo rakta lochanah |   
Vilokya tat gurum praaha sphurita adhara pallavah ||*** *Sri Paraasharar - Hiranyakashipu*, having heard this, became extremely angry and his eyes became red like blood. His lips were shivering, and he said, looking at the gurus. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 17:    
Hiranyakashipuh - *** [[544]] ***Brahma bandho kim etat te vipaksha stuti samhitam |   
Asaaram graahito baalo maamavajnyaaya durmate || ****Hiranyakashipu *- O *Brahma bandhu*, what is that you have taught him, which is praising my enemy? He is having all *asaara*, which is showing disrespect to me, which is not the right thing to learn. 



*Brahma bandhu * means a *brahmin * who does not follow any of the duties, the *varna aashrama dharmaas*. He is a *braahmana adhama*. ***   


## 18
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 18:    
Guruh -   
Daityeshvara na kopasya vasham aagantum arhasi |   
Mama upadesha janitam na ayam vadati te sutah ||*** *Guru * says - O king of demons, you should not get angry. He is not telling what I have taught him. This is not what I taught him. 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 19:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
Anushishto asi kena eedruk vatsa prahlaada kathyataam |   
Mayaa upadishtam na iti esha prabraveeti guruh tava || ****Hiranyakashipu *- O son *Prahlaada*, tell me who taught you all this? Your guru says that he is not the one who taught you this. This is not what he taught. ***   


## 20
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 20:    
Prahlaadah -   
Shaastaa vishnuh asheshasya jagato yo hrudi sthitah |   
Tam rute paramaatmaanam taata kah kena shaasyate ||*** *Prahlaada *- O father, in this entire world, *Vishnu * who is residing in the hearts, He is the teacher. Without Him, how can anyone teach anything and who can be taught by whom? *Paramaatman * is the ultimate teacher. He is residing in everyone's heart, and is the ultimate teacher. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Shaastaa iti | Shaastaa shaasitaa | Shaasyate shikshyate |*** *Shaastaa* means one who teaches. 





## 21
 [[545]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 21: *** ***Hiranyakashipuh - *** ***Ko ayam vishnuh su durbuddhe yam braveeshi punah punah |*** ***Jagataam eeshvarasya iha puratah prasabham manah ||*** *Hiranyakashipu *- O bad minded *Prahlaada*, who is this Vishnu about whom you are talking about again and again. That too, in front of me, who is the lord of all the worlds. I am directly in front of you, I am lord of all the worlds. ***   


## 22
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 22:    
Prahlaadah -   
Na shabda gocharam yasya yogi dhyeyam param padam |   
Yato vishvam svayam vishvam sa vishnuh parameshvarah ||*** *Prahlaada *- His supreme nature is that He cannot be addressed by these words. *Vishnu * is One who cannot be described in words fully. He can only be meditated upon by yogis. From Whom only this whole world has emanated, sustained and destroyed. Who Himself is this whole world. He is the supreme Lord, *Parameshvara*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na iti | Padam svaroopam na shabda gocharam jaati aadi abhaavaat \*   
Yato vaacho nivartante \* iti shruteh | Vaktum ashakyam iti vaa | ***He cannot be addressed by any words like *deva, manushya, yaksha, kinnara*, because he does not have *jaati. Shruti * says that His nature cannot be explained fully by words. One cannot think that they can understand Him through their minds. One cannot describe Him fully. ***   


## 23
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 23:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
Parameshvara samjnye ajnya kim anyo mayi avasthite |   


## 24
Tathaa adya martukaamah tvam prabraveeshi punah punah ||*** *Hiranyakashipu *- O ignorant one, when I am here, who else can be called as *Parameshvara*. I am the supreme lord of the world. Looks like you want to die today. That is why you are telling again and again that someone else is the supreme lord. *** *** [[546]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 24:    
Prahlaadah -   
Na kevalam taata mama prajaanaam sa brahma bhooto bhavatah cha   
vishnuh |   
Dhaataa vidhaataa parameshvarascha praseeda kopam kurushe   
kimartham ||*** *Prahlaada *- O father, not only for me or all the people in this world, but also for you, *Vishnu * who is the *Parabrahman*, He is the supporter, controller. Why are you simply getting angry, be pleased. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na iti | Dhaataa dhaarakah | Vidhaataa nirmaataa | ***He is the supporter and creator. ***   


## 25
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 25:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
Pravishtah ko asya hrudaye durbuddheh iti paapa krut |   
Yena eedrushaani asaadhooni vadati aavishta maanasah ||*** Who has entered into this boy's mind, who has done great sins? He speaks as though his mind has been seized by some spirit. He is telling all the wrong things. 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 26:    
Prahlaada -   
Na kevalam mat hrudayam sa vishnuh aakramya lokaan akhilaan   
avasthitah |   
Sa maam tvat aadeemscha pitah samastaan samasta cheshtaasu yunakti   
sarvagah \(sarvatah\) || ***O father, you are telling about who has entered into my mind, making me tell all these things. Not only my mind, He has pervaded the entire world. Not only me, for you and everybody, He is the all pervading Vishnu, who engages not only me, you, but everybody in all functions, and actions that we do. 





## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 27:    
Hiranyakashipuh - *** [[547]] ***Nishkraamyataam ayam paapah shaasyataam cha guroh gruhe |   
Yojito durmatih kena vipaksha vishaya stutou || ****Hiranyakashipu *- Take him away from here, and let him be taught in the guru's house and teach him properly. I don't know who has taught him all these things which are praising my enemies. I do not know which bad minded person has taught him so. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Nishkraamyataam iti | Vipaksha patita stutou iti cha paathah |   
Vipaksha patitasya stutou kena yojita iti nirvedah | ***He is feeling bad about who taught *Prahlaada * to praise his enemies. 





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 28:    
Sri Paraasharar -   
Iti ukto asou tadaa daityaih neeto guru gruham punah |   
Jagraaha vidyaam anisham guru shushrooshana udyatah || ****Sri Paraasharar *- Being told thus, all the demons, take him again to the guru's house. There he was serving his guru and was learning all the things everyday. 





## 29
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 29:    
Kaale ateete ati mahati prahlaadam asureshvarah |   
Samaahooya abraveet gaatha kaachit putraka geeyataam || ***After a long time passed, the king of demons, *Hiranyakashipu * called *Prahlaada*, and told him, O son, tell something that you have learnt, some *shlokaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kaala iti | Gaathaa shlokah | ****Gaatha * means *shloka*. ***   


## 30
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 30:    
Prahlaadah -   
Yatah pradhaana purushou yatah cha etat chara acharam |   
Kaaranam sakalasya asya sa no vishnuh praseedatu ||*** *Prahlaada *- From whom all these sentients and non-sentients are born, all  [[548]] the movables and immovables are because of whom, He is the cause of everything, that *Vishnu*, may He be pleased. This *shloka * is the essence of everything. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yata iti | Charaacharam kaaryabhootam jagat |   
   


## 31
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 31:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
Duraatmaa vadhyataam esha na anena artho asti jeevitaa |   
Sva paksha haani kartrutvaat yah kula angaarataam gatah || ***Let this bad boy be killed, by his living, there is no use. He is destroying my own clam. He is like a burning charcoal for our *kula*. Let him be put to death. ***   


## 32
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 32:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Iti aajnyaaptaah tatah tena pragruheeta mahaa aayudhaah |   
Udyataah tasya naashaaya daityaah shata sahasrashah ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- Being ordered by *Hiranyakashipu * thus, hundreds of thousand of demons started to come after him, carrying all the big weapons, to destroy him. 





## 33
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 33:    
Prahlaadah -   
Vishnuh shastreshu yushmaasu mayi cha asou yathaa aasthitah |   
Daiteyaah tena satyena maakramantvaayudhaani vah || ****Prahlaada *- This *Vishnu*, as He is residing in me, as well as in all your weapons, I am seeing Vishnu only everywhere. By that *satya*, by that *Param **Brahma Vishnu*, your weapons, let them not do any harm to me. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vishnuh iti | Maakramantvaanta iti atra maamityadhyaahaarah |   
   


## 34
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 34:    
Sri Paraasharah - *** [[549]] ***Tatah taih shatasho daityaih shastroghaih aahato api san |   
Naavaapa vedanaam alpaam abhoot cha eva punah navah ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- Hundreds of thousands of *daityaas * threw weapons at him, a flood of weapons were thrown at *Prahlaada*. He did not experience even little pain because of that, not only that, he became again very lively and energetic. ***   


## 35
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 35:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
Durbuddhe vinivartasva vairi pakshah tavaadatah |   
Abhayam te prayacchaami maa atimoodhamatih bhava ||*** *Hiranyakashipu *- Stop praising my enemy from now on. Don't become ignorant and dull minded. Listen to me, I am giving you *abhaya*, I will protect you. 





## 36
The next *shloka * is a very wonderful *shloka*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 36:    
Prahlaadah -   
Bhayam bhayaanaam apahaarini sthite manasi anante mama kutra   
tishthati |   
Yasmin smrute janma jaraa antakaadi bhayaani sarvaani apayaanti   
taata || ****Prahlaada *- When the One who destroys all fears, that *Ananta*, when He is established in my mind, occupying my entire mind, where is the place for fear in my mind? Fear has no place in my mind. If you just remember that *Ananta Vishnu*, the fears of birth, old age, death, will just run away. 





## 37
Next, *Hiranyakashipu * orders *sarpaas * to bite *Prahlaada*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 37:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
Bho bhoh sarpaah duraachaaram enam atyanta durmatim |   
Visha jvaalaakulaih vaktraih sadyo nayata samkshayam || ****Hiranyakashipu *- This one who has bad conduct and bad mind, O serpents, with the fire like venom, you just destroy him immediately. ***   


## 38
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 38:  *** [[550]] ***Sri Paraasharah -   
Iti uktaah te tatah sarpaah kuhaka takshaka aadayah |   
Adashanta samasteshu gaatreshu ati visha ulbanaah ||*** *Sri Paraashara *- All the dangerous serpents, *Takshaka * and others, pouring venom from all their body, tried to bite him all over. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Iti iti | Kuhakaah krooraah |   
   


## 39
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 39:    
Sa tu aasakta matih krushne dashyamaano mahaa uragaih |   
Na viveda aatmano gaatram tat smruti aahlaada samsthitah ||*** He was so much immersed deeply in the meditation of *Vishnu*, that even though he was being bitten by all these great serpents, throughout the body, he never realized anything and any of their bites. He was fully immersed in the bliss of thought of Vishnu. He never felt his body also. ***   


## 40
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 40:    
Sarpaah oochuh -   
Damshtraa visheernaa manayah sphutanti phaneshu taapo hrudayeshu   
kampah |   
Na asya tvachah svalpam apeeha bhinnam prashaadhi daityeshvara   
kaaryam anyat ||*** The serpents tell - O king of demons, please tell us to do something else. Our *manis * and teeth are all getting broken, and our mind is vibrating with fear. We are feeling lot of heat in our hoods, and are not able to tolerate all this ourselves. His skin is not torn even a little bit - we are only suffering everything. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Damshtraa iti | Damshtraa visheernaa iti vishasya praatilomyaat | ***



*Hiranyakashipu * continues with all the other things, to torture *Prahlaada * who is so much immersed in the thought of *Vishnu. Sri **Paraasharar * starts to continue further. We will see these in the next class. 



 [[551]] So far, we saw some wonderful *shlokaas * as told by *Prahlaada*, which are quoted in many *pramaanaas * and *vyaakhyaanaas*, about *Vishnu bhakti*. 



***Recap***: We are studying *Prahlaada's charitra*, where *Hiranyakashipu * is giving all kinds of trouble to destroy *Prahlaada*, but is failing in every attempt, because of the devotion which *Prahlaada * had. *Hiranyakashipu * sends venomous serpents, *Takshaka * and others, who could not do anything. *Prahlaada * is not even aware of his body, as he is deeply meditating on Vishnu. ***   


## 39
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 39:    
Sa tu aasakta matih krushne dashyamaano mahaa uragaih |   
Na viveda aatmano gaatram tat smruti aahlaada samsthitah ||*** With the bliss of remembrance of *Paramaatman*, he did not even realize that he was in a body. He was not even aware of his body. ***   


## 40
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 40:    
Sarpaah oochuh -   
Damshtraa visheernaa manayah sphutanti phaneshu taapo hrudayeshu   
kampah |   
Na asya tvachah svalpam apeeha bhinnam prashaadhi daityeshvara   
kaaryam anyat ||*** Serpents say - Our teeth are totally broken, we are experiencing terrible heat in our hood, our minds are trembling with fear. His skin was not injured even a little bit, though we are biting him with our sharp fangs. Please tell us some other work to do. We are unable to do anything to *Prahlaada*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Damshtraa iti | Damshtraa visheernaa iti vishasya praatilomyaat |   
   


## 41
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 41:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
He diggajaa sankata danta mishraa ghantainam asmat   
ripupakshabhinnam |   
Tajjaa vinaashaaya bhavanti tasya yathaa araneh prajvalito hutaashah   
||***  [[552]] Then, he calls the *diggajaas*, elephants which are controlling the directions, with closely present tusks, and said 'Kill this boy, he is not on our side, he is on the side of the enemies. Whatever is born from him, will only be destroying me and our *vamsha*, just as fire born of *arani*, wood, destroys *arani*, wood itself'. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
He diggajaa iti | Sankateti | Chaturdantatayaa paraspara nibida danta   
yuktaah | Ripu pakshena bhinnam asmato bhedinam | Tasya janakasya   
| ****Diggajaas * are supposed to have four tusks, which are very closely present. Because he is on the side of the enemies, he is different from us. 



When two *aranis * are rubbed against each other, the fire is created, and that fire burns the wood itself. Fire which is born of wood burns the wood itself. Like that, he will destroy our clan, says *Hiranyakashipu*. ***   


## 42
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 42:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Tatah sa diggajaih baalo bhoobhrut shikhara sannibhaih |   
Paatito dharaneeprushthe vishaanaih api apeedyata |*** *Sri Paraasharar *- Those *diggajaas * were as huge as huge peaks of mountains, and they felled him on the ground. With their tusks, they started to torture him. 





## 43
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 43:    
Smaratah tasya govindam ibadantaah sahasrashah |   
Sheernaa vakshasthalam praapya sa praaha pitaram tatah || ***He was all the time meditating on *Govinda*. All the tusks of the *diggajaas * trying to pierce his chest, they were broken and torn away, and at that time, *Prahlaada * tells *Hiranyakashipu*. 





## 44
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 44:    
Dantaa gajaanaam kulishaagra nishthuraah sheernaa yat etena balam   
mama etat |   
Mahaa vipat taapa \(paapa\) vinaashano ayam janaardana *** [[553]] ***anusmaranaanubhaavah || ***All the tusks of the elephants, which were as sharp as the edge of a spear, were completely broken, because of the power that I have. How did I get that power? Because of the continuous remembrance of *Janaardana*, that is the power I have. Continuous remembrance of *Janaardana * can destroy even great *taapaas * or *paapaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aprushto api bhagavan maahaatmya jnyaapanaaya aaha dantaa iti | ***Why did *Prahlaada * say this though he was not asked by *Hiranyakashipu*? This is to remind *Hiranyakashipu * of the greatness, and power of remembering *Bhagavaan*. 





## 45
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 45:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
Jvaalyataam asuraa vanhih apasarpata diggajaah |   
Vaayo samedhaya agnim tvam dahyataam esha paapakrut || ****Hiranyakashipu * then asked the elephants to move away. He then tells the demons to light fire all over. O Wind, help this fire to grow bigger and burn more fiercely. Let this sinner be burnt. 





## 46
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 46:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Mahaa kashthachayacchannam asurendra sutam tatah |   
Prajvaalya daanavaa vanhim dadahuh svaaminoditaah || ****Sri Paraasharar *- All the *daanavaas * lighted fire all around and brought huge fire sticks and put them all around *Prahlaada*, and tried to burn him. ***   


## 47
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 47:    
Prahlaadah -   
Tata esha vanhih pavanerito api na maam dahyati atra samantato   
aham |   
Pashyaami padmaastaranaastrutaani sheetaani sarvaani dishaam   
mukhaani ||*** *Prahlaada * says - O father, this fire, even though it is helped by winds, and is burning fiercely, does not burn me even a bit. All over me, I am only seeing  [[554]] all the lotus petals spread over and give me a very pleasant feeling and cool atmosphere. 





## 48
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 48:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Atha daityeshvaram prochuh bhagavasya aatmajaa dvijaah |   
Purohitaa mahaatmaanah saamnaa samstooya vaagminah || ****Sri Paraasharar* - At this time, *Shukraachaarya's * children, known as *Shanda, **Marka*, and others, came and told *Hiranyakashipu*. They had very good power of speech, and told convincing words to *Hiranyakashipu*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha iti | Dvijaah shanda marka aadayah |   
   


## 49
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 49:    
Purohitaah oochuh -   
Raajan niyamyataam kopo baale api tanaye nije |   
Kopo devanikaayeshu teshu te saphalo yatah ||*** *Purohitaas * said - O King, please do control your anger towards this child who is your son. You have to get angry with the host of gods, because they are the ones who are giving this power to him. 





## 50
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 50:    
Tathaa tathaa enam baalam te shaasitaaro vayam nrupa |   
Yathaa vipaksha naashaaya vineetah te bhavishyati || ***We will instruct him in such a way that he will come on your side, and will also destroy your enemy only. 





## 51
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 51:    
Baalatvam sarva doshaanaam daitya raajaaspadam yatah |   
Tato atra kopam atyartham yoktum arhasi na arbhake || ***A child has all kinds of defects, this is the characteristic of childhood. Because of that, you should not get so angry with this boy, because childhood has defects by itself. 





## 52
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 52:  *** [[555]] ***Na tyakshyati hareh paksham asmaakam vachanaat yadi |   
Tatah krutyaam vadhaayaasya karishyaamo anivartineem || ***In case we give him instructions also, in case he does not leave the side of *Hari * and come to our side, some being created by the *abhichaara krutya*, will go and destroy the enemy, and there will be no return after that for him. We will do such *abhichaara karmaas*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na iti | Krutyaa abhichaara janyo bhoota visheshah |*** *Abhichaara karmaas * are told here, which are told in the *Vedaas*, used to destroy enemies. ***   


## 53
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 53:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Evam abharthitah taih tu daitya raajah purohitaih |   
Daityaih nishkaasayaamaasa putram paavaka samchayaat ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- He told the demons to take him out of the fire, being prayed thus by the *purohitaas*. ***   


## 54
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 54:    
Tato guru gruhe baalah sa vasan baala daanavaan |   
Adhyaapayaamaasa muhuh upadeshaantare guroh ||*** *Prahlaada * is sent to the *gurukula * of *Shukraachaarya's * children; they take him and start instructing him. There, whenever they are not teaching, when there is no *adhyayana * being done, he starts to teach all the children of the *daanavaas*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tata iti | Upadeshantare adhyaapanasya viccheda avasare |*** 





## 55
This is the most wonderful teaching of *Prahlaada * to the *daitya baalakaas*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 55:    
Prahlaadah -   
Shrooyataam paramaartho me daiteyaa ditija aatmajaah |   
Na cha anyathaa etat mantavyam na atra lobhaadi kaaranam ||*** *Prahlaada *- O children of *Diti's * children, what is the ultimate that anyone  [[556]] should desire? I am going to tell you, do listen to me. Don't think that I am doing for any other gain. I am not doing this to cheat you, or to create delusion in you. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shrooyataam iti | Paramaarthah parama purushaarthah | Lobhaadi   
ityaadi shabdena anaaptatva hetu bhrama vipralambaadi grahanam | ***I am your *aapta, hitaishi*, I am doing good for you. Not for personal gains, or selfish motive, not to cheat you, not to drive you in the wrong path. 





## 56
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 56:    
Janma baalyam tatah sarvo jantuh praapnoti youvanam |   
Avyaahataa eva bhavati tato anudivasam jaraa || ***A being who is born, is born \( *janma * happens\), then he gets into boyhood \( *baalya*\), then they get into the youth. After that, without any break, every day, he will be getting old. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Janma iti trishlokyaa dehaatmanoh anityatva nischayatve vadati |*** In three *shlokaas * starting with this, *Prahlaada * is teaching the *nityatva * of *aatman*, and *anityatva * of the *deha. Aatma * is eternal, and *deha * is impermanent. ***   


## 57
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 57:    
Tatah cha mrutyum abhyeti jantuh daityeshvara aatmajaah |   
Pratyaksham drushyate cha etat asmaakam bhavataam tathaa ||*** O children of *Hiranyakashipu's * clan, after getting old, a being will die. We can perceive this directly with respect to us, you, anyone. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tata iti | Drushyate cha etat janma aadi panchakam | ***This is called *janma aadi panchaka - janma, baalya, youvana, jaraa, **mrutyu. * 





## 58
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 58:    
Mrutasya cha punarjanma bhavati etat cha naanyathaa | *** [[557]] ***Aagamo ayam tathaa tat cha na upaadaanam vinaa udbhavah || ***One who dies is born again. This is the truth, and is known from the *Aagamaas, Vedaas*. This is also supported by logic. We are born in this body, and experiencing happiness, sorrow right from our birth, it is the result of fruits of *karmaas * done earlier. When one dies, the entire thing getting destroyed - such a thing cannot happen. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dehino dehaat oordhvam cha sattvaat nityataa iti aaha mrutasya iti |   
Punarjanma bhaavi deha grahanam syaat eva | Anyathaa mrutasya   
janma abhaave, etat cha vartamaanam janma cha na syaat | Atra   
pramaanam, ayam adhyetrubhih pratyaksham pathyamaanah, \* Sa itah   
prayanneva punarjaayate \* Atha etam eva adhvaanam punarnivartante   
\* Mrutvaa punah mrutyum aapadyante \* ityaadiraagamah | Yat   
aagamena uktam tat cha tathaa eva iti anugraahakam tarkam   
chaarvaakaadeen prati aaha na upaadaanam iti | Prati praani   
prateeyamaanah sukha dukhaadi kaaryodbhavah praak janma kruta   
sukrutaadi vishishtham sthaayinam aatmaanam upaadaana kaaranam   
vinaa na syaat iti arthah | Prayaksham eva na anumaana aagamou iti   
vadato vaadino yukti poorvo vivaadah sva shaastra pranayanam cha   
vyaahatam iti bhaavah |*** *Dehi * is the *aatma*, who is in the *deha*. Even after the body is destroyed, the *aatman * lives. He will get into another body. If he is not born again, even the current birth that we have cannot happen. If another birth happens, then we can actually justify our current birth. This is the *pramaana * for that, the students are learning all this in *Aagama*, 'Having died and gone from here, he is again born', 'The path in which he goes - the same path he returns here', the path of *Pitru yaana* is told, 'Having died, he will again get into *samsaara*, and again die'. Whatever is told in *Aagamaas*, is again supported by *tarka*, which is in line with what is taught in the *Aagamaas. **Tarka * is logic, which by itself cannot be an independent *pramaana * for *ateendriya vishayaas*. Logic is also useful in order to understand what is taught in the *Shrutis*, in order to also make things more firm and clear in our mind. This is against the *Chaarvaakaas*, who say that only the *Pratyaksha pramaana * is accepted, and they say that *Shruti * is not a *pramaana *- they say that *deha * is itself the *aatman*, and destruction of  [[558]] the body is itself *moksha*; they say that when the body is burnt and becomes ashes, how can it come again; this is not acceptable. The logic which *Prahlaada Aalwaar * is telling here is supporting what is taught in the *Shrutis *- that without a material cause, an effect cannot happen. If one is born, there has to be a material cause for that, and if the soul was not there, he could not have been born taking another body. In every being, what is seen is the effects of *sukha * and *dukha*. In the previous births, whatever *sukruta * and *duskhruta * which one has done, having all these, if an *aatman*, the *upaadaana kaarana*, is not there, such an experience of *sukha * and *dukha * cannot happen. The experience of *sukha * and *dukha * happens in the *aatman * himself, and he is the cause of that only. He is also *nimitta kaarana*, and also the *upaadaana kaarana*. The experience of *sukha * and *dukha * happens in the *aatman * himself, because of the virtuous deeds and sins. This is the logic used here to justify that *aatman * is permanent, and eternal, and is only born again. This is how beings are born again and again, and undergo *janma, baalya, youvana, **jaraa, mrutyu*. When they \( *Chaarvaakaas*\) say that *pratyaksha * only is the *pramaana*, they are refuted here, through this logic. ***   


## 59
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 59:    
Garbha vaasa aadi yaavat tu punarjanma upapaadanam |   
Samasta avasthakam taavat dukham eva avagamyataam ||*** Again, he will be residing in the womb, and then he is born, the soul who is present in all these states, they all lead to sorrow only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Nityasya api aatmano anitya deha aadikam garbha aadi punarjanma   
aapti paryanta sapta avasthaa yuktam dukha hetuh iti vairaagyaaya   
aaha garbha vaasa aadi iti | ***Seven states are told - *garbha, janma, baalya, youvana, jaraa, **mrutyu * and *punarjanma*. They are all causes of grief only. One should get *virakti, vairaagya*. ***   


## 60
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 60:    
Kshut trushna upashamam tadvat sheetaadi upashamam sukham |   
Manyate baala buddhitvaat dukham eva hi tat punah ||***  [[559]] When there is hunger, thirst, and also when there is extreme cold, and when these are removed, one will feel very happy. If we are very thirsty, and we get water to drink, we feel happiness. Similarly, when extreme cold is removed by fire, we feel very comfortable and happy. These are all because of the childish mind, which is not wise, and does not have the proper understanding of the things, because again, it causes grief only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Nanvannapaanaadeenaam sukha hetutvasya darshanaat katham   
dukham eva iti uktam iti aashankya dukha hetou eva sukha hetutva   
bhrama iti aaha kshut trushna iti | Kshut sheeta aadi dukha   
shaamakamat agni aadi dukham eva sukha saadhanam manyate baalah   
| Hirhi hetou | Tadannaadikam kshut aadi abhaave punarudgaaraa   
jeerna santaapa aadi dukha hetuh eva | ***Food, drinks, etc., cause happiness is well known, and so, how is told as the cause of grief, is the doubt raised. The answer is that it is wrong understanding that that which causes grief is bringing happiness. This is told in the *shloka 'Kshut sheetaadi*'. Fire which burns and causes grief is thought to be causing happiness, in the presence of cold, and so thought of a means of happiness. When hunger is not there, food itself causes vomiting, indigestion, etc., which makes one suffer, and so they only become causes of grief. ***   


## 61
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 61:    
Atyanta stimita angaanaam vyaayaamena sukhaishinaam |   
Bhraanti jnyaana aavrutaakshaanaam \(prahaaro api\) dukhameva   
sukhaayate |*** When someone is having a lot of suffering all over the body, and old age, any exercising movement which is given is like happiness. Those whose knowledge is covered with delusion, wrong understanding, *dukha * itself leads to *sukha, vyaayaama * is also *aayaasa * only, but they think that they are seeking more happiness, but it is actually wrong understanding. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dukha hetutvena prasiddheh api dukhaantara upashaamakatva   
maatrena sukha hetutvadheeh drushyate iti nidarshanena aaha atyanta *** [[560]] ***iti | Vyaayaamah aayaasah |*** If we say that all these seven states are causes of grief only, but when we experience here, there are certain things which give an illusion of giving happiness. Though some are well known to cause sorrow, because they are known to destroy some other grief, they are thought to be causes of happiness. This is explained through an example in the *shloka 'atyanta' *. 





## 62
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 62:    
Kva shareeram asheshaanaam shleshmaadeenaam mahaachayah |   
Kva kaanti shobhaa soundarya kamaneeyaadayo gunaah || ***This body, which is a great collection of phlegm and all kinds of dirty things like blood and muscle, they see the qualities of grace, shine and beauty. \( *Bhaava* is where is the question of such body filled with dirt exhibiting such qualities\). 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tathaa sva para dehe shleshmaadi chaye dukhade api kaantyaadi   
aaropaat sukha hetutva dhiyam darshayati kva shareeram iti |   
Kamaneeyam kamaneeyatvam | ***Though my body, other's body, have phlegm and other things which are collected inside, which only leads to grief, qualities like grace, beauty are superimposed on that, and one feels that it is very pleasurable and leads to joy. 





## 63
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 63:    
Maamsa asruk pooya vin mootra snaayu majja asthi samhatou |   
Dehe chet preetimaan moodho bhavitaa narake api asou \(api sah\) || ***This body is a collection of muscles, blood, secretions of the glands like pus, faeces, urine, veins, bone marrow, bones; in such a body which has all these things inside, if one is liking that body here, he should be enjoying even in hell. In hell, all these are seen separate from the body, and one suffers in hell. Even here, it is very much the same state, but because it is covered, it creates a feeling of being joyous, happy. Here, if one enjoys such things, even in hell he should enjoy.  [[561]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kim cha narake mala maamsaadikam aatmano anyatvena bhujyate |   
Atra tu tat samooha deham aatmatvena bhogyatvena cha manyamaano   
narake preeya etataraam iti abhipraayena aaha maamsa iti | ***These things like muscles, faeces, etc. are experienced as different from the soul in *naraka*. Whereas here, the body which is the collectivity of all these, is enjoyed as ones own and very pleasurable. If it was true that it is pleasurable, such a person should also be enjoying in hell also. ***   


## 64
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 64:    
Agneh sheetena toyasya trushaa bhaktasya cha kshudhaa |   
Kriyate sukha kartrutvam tat vilomasya chetaraih ||*** Through fire, extreme cold is eliminated. Thirst is removed with water. One who has taken food, his hunger will be destroyed. This brings in a feeling of happiness in them. Having lot of thirst, if there is no water, it causes grief. Hunger, when there is no food, will cause a lot of grief. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kshut trushna iti shloka uktam vivrunoti agneh iti | Agneh pratiyoginaa   
sheetena sukha kartrutvam kriyate, na tu svatah | Evam toya   
bhaktayoh trut kshutbhyaam tat vilomasya teshaam agni aadeenaam   
pratiyoginah sheetaadeh itaraih agni aadibhih sukha kartrutvam   
kriyate | Yat vaa tat vilomasya sukha vilomasya dukhasya kartrutvam   
agni aadeenaam sheetaadeenaam abhaavaih kriyata iti | Evam   
aniyatatvaat ubhayam api bhraantam; yathaa vakshyati \* Tasmaat   
dukhaatmakam naasti na cha kinchit sukhaatmakam \* iti | *** Whatever was told in the earlier *shloka*, is explained here. The *pratiyogi * of *agni * is *sheeta*, and vice versa. By itself, fire does not cause joy to someone, it burns and causes grief. If there is extreme cold, if fire is brought, it causes a feeling of happiness. Similarly, when one has taken too much water, we cannot give water to such a person; he will just reject it. Whereas when one is very thirsty, that water causes happiness and sometimes it causes grief also. Similarly with food - when one has overeaten, food itself causes grief, and leads to more trouble. Whereas when one is very hungry, it gives a feeling of happiness. Otherwise, if it is  [[562]] not there, if food is not there, when one is hungry, the absence of that causes *dukha*, and the presence of that causes *sukha*. Because it is not definitive whether food causes happiness or grief, it is wrong understanding that it causes happiness or grief alone. It will be told later that there is nothing which is *sukhaatmaka * or *dukhaatmaka*, and the object by itself is not causing *sukha * or *dukha*, but one's experiences or the state is what is causing that. ***   


## 65
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 65:    
Karoti he daitya sutaah yaavat maatram parigraham |   
Taavat maatram sa eva asya dukham chetasi yacchati ||*** As long as one starts owning and accepting family, house, etc. and gets attached to them, O children of demons, his mind will go one getting filled with grief only. He will experience more and more grief only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Evam bhrutya dhana aadi api dukhadam iti aaha karoti iti |   
Parigruhyate iti parigrahah | ***





## 66
This is a wonderful *shloka*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 66:    
Yaavatah kurute jantuh sambandhaan manasah priyaan |   
Taavanto asya nikhanyante hrudaye shoka shankavah || ***As much as something is agreeable, desirable, liked by someone, the more one develops attachment, the more the thorns of grief are firmly implanted in the heart, mind. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tathaa kalatraadi sambandhyi api iti aaha yaavatah iti | Sambandhah   
| Sambandhino na sthiraah, tat naashe shokah tu sthirah iti arthah | ***In the same way, wife and other relations cause grief only. Persons who are related or attached are not eternal, so when they get destroyed, it causes grief which will be there permanently. Relatives are not permanent, but when they die, the grief which comes is permanent. 





## 67
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 67:  *** [[563]] ***Yat yat gruhe tat manasi yatra kutra avatishthatah |   
Naashadaaha upakaranam krutah tatra eva tishthati || ***Whatever materials and things we have in our house, that, wherever we go, will cause worry in our mind - what happens if something is stolen, burnt or destroyed. These torture his mind and create anxiety. Though they are not destroyed, thinking about them, and because of the attachment, this causes anxiety. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kincha ajnyaanaam parigrahaadeh sannidhou asannidhou cha shokah   
sama iti aaha - yat yat iti | Yat yat gruhe vastu tasya naasha   
daahaadikaranam kutah syaat iti yatra kutra avatishtatah svaamino   
manasi tat tishthati iti anvayah | Karanam eva upakaranam gruhe   
kshemena sthitam api premnaa anyathaa aashankino dukhaaya eva   
sarvam vastu iti arthah | Naasha daaha upaharanam iti cha paathah |   
Yatra tatra avatishthata iti cha paathah | ***Ignorant ones, whatever things they possess, whether it is near them, or not near them, it causes equal grief. Though it is very safe in the house, because of the attachment that one has towards those things, they will start thinking that 'What if it is destroyed?', because of this, everything causes grief only. 





## 68
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 68:    
Janmani atra mahat dukham mriyamaanasya cha api tat |   
Yaatanaasu yamasya ugram garbha sankramaneshu cha || ***When one is born here, he experiences great *dukha*. When one dies also, the same thing happens. When he goes in front of *Yama*, he will be suffering in hell. Or, he will be born in another body, and again experiences sorrow only. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Evam baalyaadishu pratyaksham dukham uktvaa janmaadishu api tat   
eva anumeyam iti aaha janmani iti | Janmaadishu dukham anumeeyata   
iti anvayah |*** Having told that in all the states that we live here, childhood, youth, old age, etc., he says that even in birth and death, the same thing happens. It is  [[564]] inferred that even in birth and death also, there is sorrow only. 





## 69
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 69:    
Garbhe cha sukha lesho api bhavadbhih anumeeyate |   
Yadi tat kathyataam evam sarvam dukhamayam jagat || ***If you think that there is some kind of slight happiness while staying in the womb, it is not so. This whole world is full of sorrow only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Garbhe cha iti | Sukha lesho api yadi tat kathyataam tat sukham naasti   
iti arthah | Tasmaat evam dukhamayam jagat | ***Tell me is there any little happiness while staying in the womb? There is no such happiness. In this way, the whole world is full of sorrow and grief. 





## 70
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 70:    
Tat evam ati dukhaanaam aaspade atra bhava arnave |   
Bhavataam kathyate satyam vishnuh ekah paraayanam || ***Having told that all this world is all *dukha * only, now he tells what causes *sukha*. This huge ocean of *samsaara*, which is abode to great sorrow, I am telling you the truth is that your only resort or refuge is Vishnu only. He is the only refuge for one who desires *moksha * or *aananda*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tasmaat bhagavat praapti lakshano mokshah praarthya iti aaha tat   
evam iti |*** One has to desire the *Parama Purushaartha * which is *moksha*, which is nothing but attaining *Bhagavaan Vishnu*. ***   


## 71
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 17, Shloka 71:    
Maa jaaneeta vayam baalaa dehee deheshu shaashvatah |   
Jaraa youvana janma aadyaa dharmaa dehasya na aatmanah ||*** Don't think that we are children. Because one who is eternal in the body, is the *aatman*. We are all eternal souls. All these attributes of *baalya, **youvana, jaraa*, birth, death, youth, old age, are attributes of the body and not the soul. He is teaching all these so that one should get *virakti*. 



 [[565]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yat ahah eva virajet iti shrutyaa jhatiti bhagavat jnyaane yatitavyam   
na vilambitavyam iti aaha maa jaaneeta iti | ***Don't think you are all children, you are all eternal souls. You are there in this body, which is now having the state of childhood, and will undergo youth, etc. *Prahlaada * is teaching this so that one should get *virakti * immediately. Immediately, one should start putting efforts to attain *Bhagavaan*. There should be no delay. 



*Yat ahah eve virajet, tat ahah eva pravrajet*, is *Shruti*. The moment *virakti * comes, the same moment, one should leave everything and go. If you delay even for a minute, you may get some other attachment, and you may not attempt escape from *samsaara * at all. 



*Prahlaada * is teaching these wonderful teachings here, to the children, and to everyone. We will continue these in the next session. Finally, he gives the summary about what one should do. 





***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying how *Amsha * 1, Chapter 18, *Prahlaada Charitram. Hiranyakashipu * is trying to torture *Prahlaada * in many ways, trying to get rid of him. He is not able to do anything as *Prahlaada * is totally immersed in the meditation of *Sri Hari, Mahaa **Vishnu * and nothing can touch him. *Hiranyakashipu * says 'Feed him with food mixed with deadly poison', and *Prahlaada * simply eats it chanting the name of *Govinda*; he just digests everything and nothing happens to him. At that time, *Hiranyakashipu * calls the *purohitaas * again. ***   


## 9
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 9:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
Tvaryataam tvaryataam sadyo he he daitya purohitaah |   


## 10
Krutyaam tasya vinaashaaya hi utpaadayata maa chiram ||*** Now, *Hiranyakashipu * calls the *purohitaas * and tells them to come quickly and hurry up, do the *abhichaara kriyaa*, and then create that ferocious being, which will destroy enemies. Don't delay anymore. *** *** [[566]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 10:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Sakaasham aagamya tatah prahlaadasya purohitaah |   
Saamapoorvam atha oochuh te prahlaadam vinayaanvitam ||*** *Sri Paraashara - Prahlaada * was very humble, because they were all gurus to him, *Shukraachaarya's * children; they come near *Prahlaada * and tell him, in nice words. ***   


## 11
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 11:    
Purohitaah -   
Jaatah trailokya vikhyaata aayushman brahmanah kule |   
Daityaraajasya tanayo hiranyakashipoh bhavaan ||*** *Purohitaas - Hiranyakashipu * is born in a great *kula*, and you are born as son of *Hiranyakashipu*, belonging to that great *kula*. Why are you going after other gods; they are of no use. ***   


## 12
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 12:    
Kim devaih kim anantena kim anyena tava aashrayah |   
Pitaa te sarva lokaanaam tvam tathaa eva bhavishyasi ||*** Who else can give you refuge? What is the use of other *devaas*, even *Ananta * or anyone else. Your father is only the support of the entire world, and you will also become like that. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kim devaih iti | Tvam tathaa eva tava pitaa eva lokaanaam aashrayo   
bhavishyati | ***





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 13:    
Tasmaat parityaja enaam tvam vipaksha stava samhitaam |   
Shlaaghyah pitaa samastaanaam guroonaam paramo guruh || ***It is well known, told in the *Vedaas * that ' *Pitru devo bhava', pitaa * is most respected among all gurus. Stop praising his enemies, and leave them, say the *purohitaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tasmaat iti | Stava samhitaam stava prabandham | Vaachyah pitaa iti *** [[567]] ***cha paathah | Vaachyah stutyah | ***





## 14
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 14:    
Prahlaadah -   
Evam etanmahaabhaagaah shlaaghyam etan mahaakulam |   
Mareecheh sakale api asmin trailokye na anyathaa vadet || ****Prahlaada *- What you said that this *kula * is a great one, and is most respected, is very true. This is *Mareechi's kula*, and in the three worlds, nobody will say that it is not so. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Evam iti | Na anyathaa vadet | Kaschit api iti sheshah | Bhavet iti vaa   
paathah | ***





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 15:    
Pitaa cha mama sarvasmin jagati utkrushta cheshtitah |   
Etat api avagacchaami satyam atra api na anrutam || ***In the entire three worlds, my father *Hiranyakashipu * is most powerful, and he has great powers through his *tapas*. It is not a lie what you said. ***   


## 16
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 16:    
Guroonaam api sarveshaam pitaa paramako guruh |   
Yaduktam bhraantih atra api svalpaa api hi na vidyate ||*** I have no doubt or wrong understanding that father is to be most respected among all gurus. 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 17:    
Pitaa guruh na sandehah poojaneeyah prayatnatah |   
Tatra api na aparaadhyaameeti evam manasi me sthitah || ***Because he is a *guru*, he has to be respected, and is to be worshipped. I have not faulted in that aspect also; I have always respected my father. ***   


## 18
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 18:    
Yat tu etat kim anantena iti uktam \(ukto\) yushmaabhih eedrusham   
\(eedrushah\) |   
Ko braveeti yathaa anyaayam kim tu na etat vacho arthavat ||***  [[568]] All these things you told is true, that *Mareechi's vamsha * is most respected, that *pitaa * is the ultimate guru, but what you said in the end - 'Kim *Anantena*', 'What is the use of going after *Ananta*', this kind of talk is not meaningful; nobody who is on the right path will say that. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yat tu iti | Brahma kulam shlaaghyam ityaadi yat bhavaduktam tat   
satyam | Kim tu kim anantena iti yat etat uktam etat vacho na   
arthavat | Eedrusham vachah yathaa anyaayam ko braveet iti anvayah   
| Kim anantena iti uktam yushmaabhih eedrusham iti cha paathah | ***The *Brahma kula*, what you said is all true. But, what you said - 'What can *Ananta * do', this is a meaningless thing. Whoever is on the right side, will not say like this. ***   


## 19
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 19:    
Iti uktvaa so abhavat mouni teshaam gourava yantritah |   
Prahasya cha punah praaha kim anantena saadhu iti ||*** *Prahlaada * has great respect for his gurus, and having told just that, keeps quiet, because he is unable to speak because of respect to his gurus. Then he smiled and said 'What you said as *Kim Anantena*, what can *Ananta * do, is proper only', 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Iti iti | Gourava yantritah gouravena yantritah niruddha vyavahaarah |   
Guroonaam api bhagavat nindakaanaam eshaam kim anusaranena iti   
aashayena prahasya kim anantena iti tat uktam anuvadan saadhu iti   
sopaalabhyam aaha prahasya iti | ***He could not speak anything more because of his respect to the gurus. *Prahlaada * said that 'Saying *Kim Anantena * is proper only', they are all ridiculing *Bhagavaan * though they are *gurus*, and I should not follow them; thinking thus, repeating what they said ' *Kim Anantena*', he tells as if he knows what it is very well; he said that it is most proper. ***   


## 20
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 20:    
Saadhu bho kim anantena saadhu bho guravo mama |   
Shrooyataam yat anantena yadi khedam na yaasyatha ||***  [[569]] What you said is most proper, what you said is very right. Do listen to me what all *Ananta * can do, what all are His qualities, powers, attributes, if you are not going to feel bad. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Amarshaat bhooyo api anuvadati saadhu bhoh kim anantena saadhu bho   
iti | Anantena yat syaat tat shrooyataam | ***Not able to tolerate what they said, and they are all ridiculing *Bhagavaan*, he said that 'What can *Ananta * do, what is the use'. Whatever *Ananta * can do, do listen to me. ***   


## 21
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 21:    
Dharma artha kaama mokshaa cha purushaarthaah udaahrutaah |   
Chatushtayam idam yasmaat tasmaat cha kim idam vruthaa ||*** Four *purushaarthaas, dharma, artha, kaama, moksha *- all these are becoming possible because of whom - from Him. What are you telling simply like that? ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Dharma iti | Idam dharma aadi chatushtayam yasmaat tasmaat   
anantaat kim idam vruthaa vachah, na kinchit iti arthah | Tasmaat kim   
kim idam vruthaa iti cha paathah |*** There is nothing that He cannot do. He can do anything, because all these *dharma, artha, kaama, moksha*, are all possible because of Him only. He is the bestower of all those benefits. He can do anything. ***   


## 22
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 22:    
Mareechimishraih dakshaadyaih tathaa eva anyaih anantatah |   
Dharmah praaptah tathaa cha anyaih arthah kaamah tathaa aparaih ||*** Addressing *Mareechi * with respect, the most respectable *Mareechi, **Daksha * and others, who are all *Prajaapathis*, and in the same way, others also, they all followed *dharma*, and obtained the fruits of following *dharma*, from *Ananta * only, and others got *artha, kaama*, and all these benefits have been got by worshipping *Ananta * only, through His grace only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** [[570]] ***Mareechi mishraih iti | Mishra shabdah poojya vachanah gurutvaat   
bahuvachanam | ***





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 23:    
Tat tattva vedino bhootvaa jnyaana dhyaana samaadhibhih |   
Avaapuh muktim apare purushaa dhvasta bandhanaah || ***While others through *jnyaana * and meditation, *samaadhi*, knowing the realities about *Parabrahman, Mahaa Vishnu*, also got liberated, got liberation itself, having got rid of this bondage of *samsaara*. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 24:    
Sampadaishvarya maahaatmya jnyaana santati karmanaam |   
Vimuktehscha ekato labhyam moolam aaraadhanam hareh || ****Hari's * worship alone is enough to get all these benefits. This is the root, one means, by which everything can be obtained, including *moksha*; it is worshipping of *Bhagavaan, Sri Hari*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sampat ityaadi | Aishvaryaadeenaam sampat vimukti cha ekatah   
aaraadhanaat eva labhyaa, hareh aaraadhanam sampat aadeenaam   
moolam | Vimuktih cha ekato labhyaa iti cha paathah | ***Whether long life or wealth or whatever one wants, including *moksha*, all of them they can get by simply worshipping *Hari*; they don't have to resort to any other means. ***   


## 25
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 25:    
Yato dharma artha kaamaakhyam muktah cha api phalam dvijaah |   
Tena api kim kim iti evam anantena kim uchyate ||*** Because of whom all these benefits can be obtained, *dharma, artha, **kaama * and *mukti * also, O gurus, for such *Ananta*, why are you telling ' *Kim **Anantena*'? Why are you telling that what can He do and give? This is not the right thing. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Uktam artham nigamayati yat iti | Tena api anantena kim kim iti evam   
vachah kimartham uchyate | *** [[571]] 





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 26:    
Kim cha api bahunoktena bhavanti guravo mama |   
Vadantu saadhu vaa asaadhu viveko asmaakam alpakah || ***What else can I say? I don't want to say more. You are all my *gurus*. Tell whether it is right or wrong, because I am not a very knowledgeable person. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kim cha iti | Kim cha ityaadi vacho api sopaalagamyam | Kim vaa atra   
iti cha paathah | ***





## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 27:    
Bahunaa atra kimuktena sa eva jagatah patih |   
Sa kartaa cha vikartaa cha samhartaa cha hrudi sthitah || ***What else can I say? He is the Master of this whole world. He is living in the heart of all, and He is the Creator, Doer, can make things undergo changes, He is the one responsible for dissolution. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bahunaa iti | Vikartaa parinaamayitaa | ***





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 28:    
Sa bhoktaa bhojyam api evam sa eva jagadeeshvarah |   
Bhavadbhih etat kshantavyam baalyaat uktam tu yat mayaa || ***He is the Overlord of this entire world, He is the Enjoyer, Enjoyed, Experiencer, Experienced, everything. As a child I am telling you, please do pardon me if I have done something wrong. 



I have told you the right thing only, but what you have told is wrong, so I am trying to correct you. 





## 29
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 29:    
Purohitaah -   
Dahyamaanah tvam asmaabhih agninaa baala rakshitah |   
Bhooyo na vakshyasi iti evam naiva jnyaato asi abuddhimaan || ****Purohitaas *- You were getting burnt in a huge fire all around you, and we  [[572]] protected you by bring you out of that fire. We protected you thinking that you will not praise *Hiranyakashipu's * enemy, *Mahaa Vishnu*, but you are not realizing, not learning from what we said. You are still ignorant. ***   


## 30
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 30:    
Yat asmat vachanaat moha graaham na tyakshate bhavaan |   
Tatah krutyaam vinaashaaya tava srakshyaami durmate ||*** Because, listening to us, if you do not give up praising your father's enemies, and come on the side of your father, *Hiranyakashipu*. We are going to create a ferocious being, from that *aabhichaaraka kriyaa*, which will destroy you. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yat iti | Moha graaham ajnyaana duraagraham |*** 





## 31
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 31: ***** *****Prahlaada - ***** *****Kah kena hanyate jantuh jantuh kah kena rakshyate |***** *****Hanti rakshati cha eva aatmaa hi asat saadhu samaacharan ||***** **Who kills whom, who can protect whom. One protects oneself by following the *shaastra * and doing the right things. And one kills oneself by doing the wrong things, not following the *shaastraas*. 



A sinner kills himself, and a virtuous one protects oneself. One has to do the right things to protect oneself. One is responsible for one's own actions, and the fruits of that. 





## 32
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 32:    
Karmanaa jaayate sarvam karma eva gati saadhanam |   
Tasmaat sarva prayatnena saadhu karma samaacharet || ***One's *karma * only is responsible, and the consequences of one's *karma*, one cannot stop and one has to experience. *Karma * only is the means for emancipation. One has to put all efforts to do the right things, to act in the right way, as per the *shaastraas*. ***   


## 33
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 33:    
Sri Paraasharah - *** [[573]] ***Iti uktaah tena te kruddhaah daitya raaja purohitaah |   
Krutyaam utpaadayaamaasuh jvaalaa maala ujjvala aakrutim ||*** *Sri Paraashara *- The *purohitaas * of *Hiranyakashipu * got very angry, when *Prahlaada * said thus. They started creating that ferocious being, of the form of a glowing ring of fire, from that *abhichaara kriyaa*. 





## 34
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 34:    
Ati bheemaa samaagamya paada nyaasa kshata kshitih |   
Shoolena saadhu samkruddhaa tam jaghaana aashu vakshasi || ***That huge mighty being, when it stepped on the earth, the whole earth trembled. Getting very angry, it started to pierce the chest of *Prahlaada * with its spear. ***   


## 35
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 35:    
Tat tasya hrudayam praapya shoolam baalasya deeptimat |   
Jagaama khanditam bhoomou tatra api shatadhaa gatam ||*** That burning spear with which they tried to pierce *Prahlaada's * chest, as soon as it touched the chest of *Prahlaada*, it fell down, and got broken into hundreds of pieces; it got destroyed immediately. ***   


## 36
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 36:    
Yatra anapaayee bhagavaan hrudi aaste harih eeshvarah |   
Bhango bhavati vajrasya tatra shoolasya kaa kathaa ||*** In whose heart that *Bhagavaan Hari*, who is the Lord of the whole world, He is all the time present, inseparably, even the *Vajra Aayudha * of *Indra * gets broken into pieces. What to tell of an ordinary spear? ***   


## 37
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 37:    
Apaape tatra paapaih cha paatitaa daitya yaajakaih |   
Taaneva saa jaghaanaashu krutyaa naasham jagaama cha ||*** What the *daitya purohitaas * did is a wrong thing. They did this *krutya*, and send the being to destroy *Prahlaada * who was without any sin. They only became sinners by trying to do harm to a most virtuous *Prahlaada * who was a *parama bhaagavatha*, without any sin. Because of that, that *krutya * killed them only, and the *krutya * also got destroyed. 





## 38
 [[574]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 38:    
Krutyayaa dahyamaanaan taan vilokya sa mahaamatih |   
Traahi krushneti ananteti vadan abhyavapadyata || ***They were all getting burnt due to that *krutya*, and the noble person *Prahlaada * saw this. He prayed for the grace of *Bhagavaan*, and said ' *Traahi Krishna Traahi Ananta*', 'Please do save, *Krishna*, do save, *Ananta*'. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Krutyayaa iti | Abhyavapattih anugrahah | ***





## 39
*Prahlaada * prays to *Bhagavaan*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 39:    
Prahlaadah -   
Sarva vyaapin jagat roopa jagat srashtah janaardana |   
Paahi vipraan imaan asmaat dussahaat mantra paavakaat ||*** *Prahlaada *- O all pervading *Janaardana*, You are the creator of the whole world, You are only present as this entire world, You destroy the difficulties of the people, You make them get rid of their birth itself \(meanings of *Janaardana*\), please do protect these *brahmins * from this unbearable fire created out of this *abhichaara kriyaa*. ***   


## 40
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 40:    
Yathaa sarveshu bhooteshu sarva vyaapee jagadguruh |   
Vishnuh eva tathaa sarve jeevantu ete purohitaah ||*** As *Bhagavaan, Jagadguru * Vishnu, who is all pervading, He resides in all beings, in the same way, let these *purohitaas * come alive again. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yathaa iti | Yathaa ityaadinaa apakaarishu api upakurvanti iti   
vaishnavaanaam aachaarah pradarshitah | ***The conduct of the *Vaishnavaas * is that even for those who do *apakaara*, they do *upakaara * only. 





## 41
Even though they tried to destroy him by creating this *krutya*, they themselves got burnt, and *Prahlaada * is trying to save them only. *** *** [[575]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 41:    
Yathaa sarva gatam vishnum manyamaano anapaayinam |   
Chintayaami aripakshe api jeevanti ete tathaa dvijaah ||*** *Vishnu * who is present everywhere, all pervading, He is inseparably present in all beings, as I am meditating like that, even in the enemies, I am having the same kind of thought that He is present in my enemies also, let these *brahmins * come alive again. ***   


## 42
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 42:    
Ye hantum aagataa dattam yaih visham yaih hutaashanah |   
Yaih diggajaih aham kshunno dashtah sarpaih cha yaih api ||*** Those who came to kill me, by whom I was given poison, some of them put me in fire, some of them tried to destroy me by bringing the *diggajaas*, those who threw serpents on me and tried to kill me, ... 





## 43
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 43:    
Teshu aham mitra pakshe cha samah paapo asmi na kvachit |   
Yathaa tena adya satyena jeevantu asura yaajakaah || ***... with respect to all of them, I have the same feeling which I have with those who are favourable to me. And I have not done any sin. I have not sinned in my mind towards them. If that is true, let these *purohitaas * come alive again. 



He prays to *Bhagavaan * saying that 'If I am seeing *Vishnu * everywhere and in everyone, and am equally disposed towards those who tried to torture me or kill me, as I am with respect to anyone favourable to me, and if I have not committed any sin, let them come alive again'. ***   


## 44
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 44:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Ityuktaah tena te sarve samsprushtaah cha niraamayaah |   
Samutthah tu dvijaa bhooyah tam oochuh prashrayaanvitam ||*** *Sri Paraashara *- The moment he said all these, they all got up, as though nothing happened to them, and told with utmost humility, they addressed *Prahlaada * thus. 





## 45
 [[576]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 45:    
Deerghaayuh apratihato bala veerya samanvitah |   
Putra poutra dhana aishvaryaih yukto vatsa bhava uttamah || ***May you live long, and may you not get any harm. May you be endowed with power, great *veerya*. May you be excellent among all, and may you have children and grandchildren, wealth and everything. ***   


## 46
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 18, Shloka 46:    
Ityuktvaa tam tato gatvaa yathaa vruttam purohitaah |   
Daitya raajaaya sakalam aachachakshuh mahaamune ||*** Having blessed him wholeheartedly, they went to *Hiranyakashipu* and told him all the things that happened, as it happened. 



This concludes the Eighteenth Chapter. 



*|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Prathame Amshe Prahlaada Charite Ashtaadasho **Adhyaayah || ** **|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Vishnu Chitteeye Prathame Amshe **Ashtaadasho Adhyaayah || *



***|| Atha Ekonavimsho Adhyaayah ||*** 



Now the Nineteenth Chapter. 


