+++
title = "19"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 1:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Hiranyakashipuh shrutvaa taam krutyaam vitatheekrutaam |   
Aahooya putram papraccha prabhaavasya asya kaaranam ||*** *Hiranyakashipu*, having heard that even the *krutya* that they did through the *abhichaara kriyaa* was of no use, and it also got destroyed, and all their efforts were in vain, he called his son and asked him 'What is the cause of this great power that you have?'. ***   


## 2
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 2:    
Hiranyakashipuh -*** [[577]] ***Prahlaada suprabhaavo asi kim etat te vichesthitam |   
Etat mantraadi janitam utaaho sahajam tava ||*** *Hiranyakashipu - Prahlaada*, you seem to have great powers. What is it that you are doing? Is it because of some mantra, that you are having this kind of power? Or is it natural to you? 





## 3
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 3:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Evam prashtah tadaa pitraa prahlaado asura baalakah |   
Pranipatya pituh paadou idam vachanam abraveet || ****Sri Paraashara *- Having been asked like this by *Hiranyakashipu, **Prahlaada* bows down and does *namaskaara* to his father, with great respect and reverence and says thus. ***   


## 4
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 4:    
Prahlaadah -   
Na mantraadi krutah taata na cha naisargiko mama |   
Prabhaava esha saamanyo yasya yasya achyuto hrudi ||*** *Prahlaada *- O father, I have not acquired these powers through any *mantra*, or it is also not natural to me. Whoever meditates and is able to realize *Achyuta* in their hearts, for them, it is a very normal thing to have such powers. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na iti | Samaana eva saamanyah | Sarvagato api achyuto bhaktasya   
shuddhe hrudi aavirbhavati, naanyasya ashuddhe | ***Though *Prahlaada* said ' *Sarvagatah, Sarvagah, Sarvavyaapin*' about *Vishnu*, it is only those who have a pure mind, and very great devotion towards *Bhagavaan* that *Bhagavaan* manifests Himself. If anyone does not have such purity of mind, *Bhagavaan* cannot be realized by them. ***   


## 5
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 5:    
Anyeshaam yo na paapaani chintayati aatmano yathaa |   
Tasya paapa aagamah taata hetu abhaavaat na vidyate ||*** One who does not sin towards others, just as one does towards oneself, for him, there can be no sin he can do, because there will be no cause.  [[578]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Taam paapa dukha bhaava roopaam aatmano hrut shuddhim   
chatusshlokyaah aaha anyeshaam ityaadinaa | ***That his mind is so pure and is filled with devotion towards *Hari*, this *Prahlaada* says starting with four *shlokaas* starting with *Anyeshaam*. 





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 6:    
Karmanaa manasaa vaachaa para peedaam karoti yah |   
Tat beejam janma phalati prabhootam tasya cha ashubham || ***One who tortures others through acts, or through mind, or through words, that will lead to sin; and to experience fruits of that sin, he has to be born again in this *samsaara*. He will be committing great sin. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Karmanaa iti | Tat beejam janma saa para peedaa eva beejam yasya   
tat janma, tasya peedayituh ashubham phalati | Tat beeja janma iti   
cha paathah |*** Those who torture others, for them, all bad things will happen, and they will be accumulating sin only. 





## 7
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 7:    
So aham na paapam icchaami na karomi vadaami vaa |   
Chintayat sarva bhootastham aatmani api cha keshavam || ***I never, even in my mind, desire ill for anyone, I don't even do bodily, or don't even speak ill of others. I am meditating all the time on Keshava, who is in me as well as present in all beings. 





## 8
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 8:    
Shaareeram maanasam dukham daivam bhoota bhavam tathaa |   
Sarvatra shubha chittasya tasya me jaayate kutah || ***When I have such good and pure feeling everywhere, my mind and heart is most pure, when I am such, either bodily grief or sorrows, or in the mind, or caused by gods, or by any other beings - there will be no sorrow or grief to me arising from any of these causes. 





## 9
 [[579]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 9:    
Evam sarveshu bhooteshu bhaktih avyabhichaarinee |   
Kartavyaa panditaih jnyaatvaa sarva bhootamayam harim || ***This is how those who are knowledgeable, those who have the *viveka **jnyaana* about what is right and wrong \(they are called *panditaas*\), realizing this, one has to act and live like this. *Hari* only is present in all beings. In that *Hari*, who is present everywhere, everything is His *prakaara*, *shareera*, undiluted devotion, only devoted to *Hari*, nobody else, or nothing else, \( *ananya prayojana*\), that kind of devotion one has to do. ***   


## 10
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 10:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Iti shrutvaa sa daityendrah praasaada shikhare sthitah |   
Krodha andhakaarita mukhah praaha daiteya kinkaraan ||*** *Sri Paraashara *- Having heard this, *Hiranyakashipu*, the king of *daityaas*, who was standing on top of a huge building, became extremely angry, and told his guards thus. ***   


## 11
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 11:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
Duraatmaa kshipyataam asmaat praasaadaat shata yojanaat |   
Giri prushte patatu asmin shilaa bhinna anga samhitah ||*** *Hiranyakashipu *- This bad boy, let him be thrown from this huge tall building \(hundred *yojanaas*\) on which he was standing; let him fall down on the rock below, and let his body be broken to pieces. Let him die thus. ***   


## 12
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 12:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Tatah tam chikshipuh sarve baalam daiteya \(kimkaraah\) daanavaah |   
Papaata so api adhah kshipto hrudayena udvahan harim ||*** *Sri Paraashara *- All the guards of *Hiranyakashipu*, they threw that boy from that huge building. He fell down, he was covering his heart that *Hari* should not get injured by this fall; He was always thinking of *Hari*, and covered his heart. ***   


## 13
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 13:  *** [[580]] ***Patamaanam jagat dhaatree jagaddhaatari keshave |   
Bhakti yuktam dadhaara enam upasangamya medinee ||*** The Earth herself came, he was having utmost devotion in *Keshava* who is supporter of the entire world. The earth is the supporter of this world, and *Keshava* supports earth also, and everything. The boy who was having utmost devotion in *Keshava*, she herself came and held him very softly. ***   


## 14
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 14:    
Tato vilokya tam svastham avisheerna asthi panjaram |   
Hiranyakashipuh praaha shambaram maayinaam varam ||*** *Hiranyakashipu* saw him that there was no injury for *Prahlaada*. He was perfectly alright on falling, he was in perfect shape, nothing happened to his bones, he was absolutely fine. He called *Shambaraasura*, who had some wonderful powers, a *maayi*. ***   


## 15
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 15:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
Na asmabhih shakyate hantum asou durbuddhi baalakah |   
Maayaam vetti bhavaan tasmaat maayayaa enam nishoodaya ||*** *Hiranyakashipu *- We are not able to kill this boy who is ignorant and bad mind. You know a lot of *maayaas*, have some wonderful powers, destroy him with your *maayaa*. 



*Maayaa* is *aascharya shakti. Paramaatman* is told as *Maayi*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na iti | Hantum na shakyate |   
   


## 16
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 16:    
Shambarah -   
Soodayaami esha daityendra pashya maayaabalam mama |   
Sahasram atra maayaanaam pashya koti shatam tathaa ||*** *Shambara *- You can see my wonderful *maaya* powers that I have. I will create thousands and crores of *maayas*, which will destroy this boy. ***   


## 17
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 17:  *** [[581]] ***Sri Paraasharah -   
Tatah sa sasruje maayaah prahlaade shambaro asurah |   
Vinaasham icchan durbuddhih sarvatra samadarshinee ||*** *Sri Paraashara - Shambara* started to create these *maayaas*, thousands, to destroy *Prahlaada. Prahlaada* was having *samadarshitva*, that everything is *Bhagavat aatmaka*, and *Bhagavaan* is present everywhere, that everything is *Bhagavaan's prakaara*. Towards such *Prahlaada*, in order to destroy such *Prahlaada*, the wicked *Shambaraasura*, started to create *maayaas* towards *Prahlaada*. ***   


## 18
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 18:    
Samaahita matih bhootvaa shambare api vimatsarah |   
Maitreya so api prahlaadah sasmaara madhusoodanam ||*** *Prahlaada's* mind was equi-poised, and he was not at all disturbed. He had not bad intentions or bad feelings towards *Shambaraasura* also. O *Maitreya, **Prahlaada* again started to think of and meditate upon *Madhusoodana* only. ***   


## 19
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 19:    
Tato bhagavataa tasya rakshaartham chakram uttamam |   
Aajagaama samaajnyaptam jvaalaamaali sudarshanam ||*** Immediately, on the order of *Bhagavaan*, to protect *Prahlaada, Sudarshana **Chakra* came, throwing fire all over, and like a ring of burning fire. ***   


## 20
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 20:    
Tena maayaa sahasram tat shambarasya aashugaaminaa |   
Baalasya rakshataa deham ekaikam cha nishooditam ||*** All the thousands of *maayaas* which *Shambaraasura* had created, *Sudarshana*, protecting this boy, destroyed all the *maayaas* one by one, as he was seeing. ***   


## 21
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 21:    
Samshoshakam tadaa vaayum daityendrah tu idam abraveet |   
Sheeghram eva mama aadeshaat duraatmaa neeyataam kshayam ||*** *Hiranyakashipu*, seeing that *Shambaraasura's* all *maayaas* were destroyed, completely, and were of no use, not doing any harm to *Prahlaada*, called *Vaayu*, that *Vaayu* which dries up everything, and said 'Destroy him  [[582]] immediately, dry him up completely'. 



*Hiranyakashipu* had all the gods under his control. 





## 22
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 22:    
Tathaa iti uktvaa to so api enam vivesha pavano laghu |   
Sheeto atirookshah shoshaaya tat dehasya ati dussahah || ***The *Vaayu* became very light and entered into *Prahlaada*, obeying the orders of *Hiranyakashipu*. He was very unbearably hard and chilling, and started to dry up the entire body. ***   


## 23
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 23:    
Tena aavishtam atha aatmaanam sa buddhvaa daitya baalakah |   
Hrudayena mahaatmaanam dadhaara dharaneedharam ||*** *Prahlaada* knew that *Vaayu* had occupied his entire body. He again thought of Him, *Bhagavaan*, who supports the whole earth. ***   


## 24
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 24:    
Hrudayasthah tatah tasya tam vaayum ati bheeshanam \(shoshanam\) |   
Papou janaardanah kruddhah sa yayou pavanah kshayam ||*** What *Janaardana*, whom *Prahlaada* had realized in his heart, did was that He became very angry and drank up that *Vaayu*, who was most fierce. That air got destroyed fully. ***   


## 25
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 25:    
Ksheenaasu sarva maayaasu pavane cha kshayam gate |   
Jagaama so api bhavanam guroh eva mahaamatih ||*** All the *maayaas* got destroyed, and even *Vaayu* was destroyed; *Prahlaada* goes back to his *guru's* place again. ***   


## 26
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 26:    
Ahani ahani yathaa aachaaryo neetim raajya phala pradaam |   
Graahayaamaasa tam baalam raajnyaam ushanasaa krutaam ||*** Again he goes for further teaching to the *gurus*, to teach him all the *raaja **neetis*, how a king should rule over a kingdom, what are his qualities. He is very obedient, and with utmost humility, he serves his gurus and learns  [[583]] this *raaja neeti*. The *raaja neeti shaastra* of *Shukraachaarya*, they start to teach him. He learns all those things. ***   


## 27
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 27:    
Gruheeta neeti shastram tam vineetam cha yadaa guruh |   
Mene tadainam tat pitre kathayaamaasa shikshitam ||*** *Gurus* think that if they teach this *raaja neeti* to him, maybe he will change, and they teach him all that. Having learnt all the *raaja neeti* with utmost humility, the gurus come and tell *Hiranyakashipu* that now he is well learned, and we have taught him all the *raaja neeti*. ***   


## 28
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 28:    
Aachaaryah -   
Gruheeta neeti shastraastre putro daitya pate krutah |   
Prahlaadah tattvato vetti bhaargavena yadeeritam ||*** *Aachaaryaas *- O *Daitya pati*, your son has learnt all the *raaja neeti*. Whatever *Bhaargava* has told, that *raaja neeti* he knows fully. 



Now, *Hiranyakashipu* asks him questions about *raaja neeti*, and the *Prahlaada Charita* continues. *Prahlaada's* devotion, and what kind of replies he gives, we will see next. 



***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying that *Hiranyakashipu* asked *Shambaraasura* to use all his *maaya shakti* to destroy *Prahlaada*. And then, *Bhagavaan's Sudarshana Chakra* comes to *Prahlaada's* rescue, and all the *maayas* of *Shambaraasura* are destroyed one by one. Even *Vaayu* cannot do anything. *Prahlaada* is then taken back to the *aachaarya's gurukula; Shukraachaarya* has written the *Raaja Neeti*, which *Prahlaada* studies; everyday, the *aachaaryas* teach the *Raaja Neeti*. Having learnt all these things, the *aachaaryas* bring *Prahlaada* back to *Hiranyakashipu*, and tell him so - ***   


## 28
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 28:    
Aachaaryah -   
Gruheeta neeti shastraastre putro daitya pate krutah |   
Prahlaadah tattvato vetti bhaargavena yadeeritam ||***  [[584]] *Aachaaryaas *- O *Daitya pati*, your son has learnt all what *Shukraachaarya* has written, and has become an expert in *Raaja **Neeti*. 





## 29
*Hiranyakashipu* asks *Prahlaada* what all he has learnt. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 29:    
Hiranyakashipuh -   
Mitreshu vartate katham arivargeshu bhoopatih |   
Prahlaada trishu lokeshu madhyastheshu katham charet || ****Hiranyakashipu *- How should a king behave or interact with friends? How with respect to enemies? 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Mitreshu iti | Mitreshu sahaja praakruta krutrimeshu | Sahajam   
maatuleyaadi | Praakrutam sva bhoomi anantaraat shatroh anantaram   
| Krutrimam daana maana vasheekrutam | Arih cha trividhah - sahajo   
daayaadah, praakruto bhoomyanantaraadih, krutrimah kruta   
apakaarakah | Madhyasthaah cha trividhaah | Trishu lokeshu   
mitraadishu trishu janeshu | Kaaleshu iti paathe kshaya vruddhi   
sthaana kaaleshu | Katham vartetah ? Vruttayo hi varshana aadaana   
anupravesha maadhyasthya poornatva priyatva sahishnutva roopaah   
sapta | Yathaa uktam \* Indrasya aarkasya vaayoh cha yamasya   
varunasya cha | Chandrasya cha pruthivyaah cha nrupah sapta guno   
bhavet | Iti | ***There are three kinds of allies or friends - natural allies, those who are in this world, and those who are created artificially or temporary friends. Natural allies are mother's brother's children, etc. All those who are in this world, who are not included among enemies, are *praakruta mitraas*. If a king has donated a lot of money to someone, he will be friendly with them, and they are friendly because of the donation received; those who are honoured will also have a friendly feeling, are artificial friends. Enemies are also of three kinds - natural are those who are waiting to snatch a part which is inherited, *praakruta* are those enemies existing in this world, artificial enemies are those to whom we have done something bad, wrong or *apakaara*. King should be aware of these three kinds of enemies. Those who are unconcerned, the *madhyasthaas* are also of three types. Three  [[585]] worlds are explained as *mitra, ari* and *madhyastha *- those who are friendly, those who are enemies, and those who are not concerned \(neither enemies nor friends\). There is a *paatha trishu kaaleshu* instead of *trishu lokeshu*. Three times means, when there is lot of prosperity, when there is lot of famine, and when things are normal. How should a king be working in these three times? This is said to be of seven kinds, as told in *Manu Smruti*. A king should be having seven attributes or qualities, the qualities of *Indra, Surya, **Vaayu, Yama, Varuna, Chandra* and *Pruthivi. Indra* causes rains for four months during the rainy season; a king showers benefits similarly on his kingdom - this is called *varshana*. Sun, Surya draws up the water, and similarly a king collects taxes - this is *aadaana*. A king enters his enemies armies through spies and other means, just as *Vaayu* enters into beings and conquers them, this is *anupravesha. Yama* is an impartial judge, just like this, the king also rules over the kingdom maintaining justice, punishes the wicked and protects the virtuous ones, this is *maadhyasthya. **Varuna* punishes sinners with *Varuna paasha*, a king also punishes the wicked, *Varuna* surrounds all around, and in a similar way a king protects all round, this is *poornatva*. Moon is pleasant to the whole world, and similarly a king causes happiness and joy to all the citizens, this is *priyatva. Pruthivi*, earth is known for forbearance, *kshamaa* is the name of earth itself, a king should also have this quality, this is *sahishnutva*. The various things that a king should do, and how he should rule over a kingdom, are told. ***   


## 30
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 30:    
Katham mantrishu amaatyeshu baahyeshu aabhyantareshu cha |   
Chaareshu pouravargeshu shankiteshu itareshu cha ||*** How should a king be with respect to ministers \( *mantri, amaatya\), **baahyaas, aabhyantaraas*, spies, people looking after the kingdom, *shankitaas*, others. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Katham iti | \* Mantree buddhi sahaayah, syaat amaatyah kaarya   
saahyakrut | Durgaadhyaksho dhanaadhyakshah \(dhaanyaa\)   
senaadhyakshah cha bhoopateh | Sootah purodhaa daivajnyah sapta   
eta mantrino mataah | Durgaadhyaksho vanaadhyakshah | 'Pootah   
purodhaah' iti cha paathah | Baahyaah amaatyah shuklaadhyakah*** [[586]] ***aadayah | Aabhyantaraah antah pura mahaanasaadhyadhikrutaah |   
Shankitaah jita daasa bhootaah saaparaadhaa vaa | Itare svaami   
hitaishinah | Dharma artha kaama bhaya pareekshaasu shuddhaa vaa | ***There is a slight difference between *mantri* and *amaatya. Mantri* is an intellectual assistant. *Amaatya* is an assistant in action, execution of the action. All these are said to be *mantris - durgaadhyaksha *\(whose who are in control of the fort\), *dhanaadhyaksha *\(those in control of the treasury\), *senaadhyaksha *\(control of the army\), *soota *\(charioteers\), *purodhaa, daivajnya. Durgaadhyaksha* is in control of forts and forests. There is a *paatha pootah purodhaah*, those who conduct *yajnyaas* and *yaagaas. Baahyaas* are *amaatyaas. Aabhyantaraas* are those who are in charge of harem \( *antahpura*\), kitchen. *Shankitaas* are those whom the king is always doubting, those who have been won over, and become servants, or those who have done some crime - a king should be very careful about such people because they will always be working against the king. Others \( *itareshu*\) are those who want to do good to the king, who are favourable to him; those who join the king's administration will be tested for their adherence to *dharma, artha *\(money - can they be lured by offering bribe\), *kaama*, fear; and those who have passed all these tests, they are also included in *itareshu*. 





## 31
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 31:    
Krutya akrutya vidhaanam cha durgaatavikasaadhanam |   
Prahlaada kathyataam samyak tathaa kantakashodhanam || ****Hiranyakashipu* is asking the various details about how a king should rule over the kingdom. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Krutya akrutya iti | Krutyaah bhedyaah | Teshaam akrutyatvasya   
abhedyatvasya vidhaanam | \* Alabdha vetano lubdho maanee cha api   
avamaanitah | Kruddhascha kopito akasmaat tathaa bheetah cha   
bheeshitah || Iti medyaah | Jala prakaara maru giri vanaatmakam   
panchadhaa durgam | Aatavikaah vanyaa mlecchaadyaah tat   
saadhanam | Kanthakah chouryah kshudra shatruh vaa | Tasya   
shodhanam saadhanam | ****Krutyaas* are those who are waiting to do something bad by bringing division  [[587]] of opinion inside, making the trusted assistants to turn against the king; they should not be able to bring about a divided opinion - what should a king do so that such a thing will not happen. A king has to be very careful about such people - they are one who has not got his salaries, one who is greedy, one who is too much egoistic, one who has been disrespected, one who is very angry and does not have control over his anger, one who is very scared - these come under the category of *bhedyaas. Durga* is of five types - mountains, forests, deserts, forts surrounding, water. *Aatavikaas* are those who live in the forests - how to control and bring them under the king's rule. *Kantakaas* are thieves, and enemies who are lowly, roaming around in the forests waiting for a chance to turn against the king - how to control and win over them. 





## 32
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 32:    
Etat cha anyat cha sakalam adheetam bhavataa yathaa |   
Tathaa me kathyataam jnyaatum tava icchaami manogatam || ***And all the other things also, I would like to know what you have learnt. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Etat iti | Anyat cha iti | Oushanasoktam sapta prakruti aadikam | ***The *angaas* of the kingdom are said to be the *prakrutis*. Whatever has been told by *Ushanas, Shukraachaarya*.* **Swaami amaatyou puram raashtram kosha dandou suhrut tathaa | **Sapta prakrutayoh hi etaah sapta angam raajyam uchyate ||* The kingdom has got seven components, which are *sapta prakrutis *- the king, ministers, the cities, nation, treasury, forces, friends. This is told in *Manu Smruti*. 





## 33
The answer of *Prahlaada* is very interesting. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 33:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Pranipatya pituh paadou tadaa prashraya bhooshanah |   
Prahlaadah praaha daityendram krutaanjali putah tathaa || ****Sri Paraashara - Prahlaada* folding his hands in reverence, does obeisance to his father, with respect, and tells him the reply.  [[588]] 





## 34
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 34:    
Prahlaadah -   
Mama upadishtam sakalam gurunaa naatra samshayah |   
Gruheetam tu mayaa kintu na sadetat matam mama || ****Prahlaada *- There is no doubt that our *aachaarya* has taught me everything. Whatever I have learnt, in my opinion, is not the right thing. I do not think that what I have learnt is the right thing that one should learn. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Mama upadishtam iti | Na sat etat shatru mitraadi bheda vishayatvaat   
asya | ***I feel it is wrong because they have taught me how to deal with allies and enemies. 





## 35
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 35:    
Saama cha upapradaanam cha bheda dandou tathaa aparou |   
Upaayaah kathitaah hi ete mitraadeenaam cha saadhane || ***With respect to dealing with friends and enemies, I was told the various means like *saama, upapradaana, bheda, danda*. ***   


## 36
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 36:    
Tena eva aham na pashyaami mitradeen taata maa krudhah |   
Saadhyaabhaave mahaabaaho saadhanaih kim prayojanam ||*** I don't see any differentiation like friend or enemy, please do not get angry with my reply. When the goal that is to be attained itself is not the right one, what is the use of learning the means? They have told me the means to deal with friends and enemies. When I don't see enemies and friends, *saadhya* itself is absent, what is the point in learning these *saadhanaas*, means? 





## 37
This is a wonderful *shloka* by *Prahlaada*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 37:    
Sarva bhootaatmake taata jagannaathe janagmaye |   
Paramaatmani govinde mitra amitra kathaa kutah || ***When the Lord of the world, *Govinda* Himself is existing in all these forms,  [[589]] whatever is manifest or unmanifest, He who has no other controller, He having all beings as His *shareera*, when such is the case that everywhere I see only *Govinda*, where is the question of differentiating one as friend and one as foe. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sarva bhootaatmaka iti | Sarva bhootaatmake sarva jeeva shareerake,   
jaganmaye vyakta avyakta prapancha roope, paramaatmani aatma   
antara rahite |*** *Paramaatman* does not have any controller or ruler, He is the ultimate controller of everyone. He is having all beings as His *shareera*. In this whole world, we see some things which are perceived by our senses, some things which are not perceived. All manifested and unmanifested are a form of *Paramaatman* only. He is the Lord of the whole world, who is *Govinda*. ***   


## 38
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 38:    
Tvayi asti bhagavaan vishnuh mayi cha anyatra cha asti sah |   
Yatah tato ayam mitram me shatruh cheti pruthak kutah ||*** That *Vishnu* is in you also. He is in me also, and is existing everywhere else. Because of this reason, how can someone separate out like 'This person is my friend', 'This person is my enemy'. Because *Vishnu* is existing in everyone. ***   


## 39
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 39:    
Tat ebhi alam aryatham \(du\) drushtaarambha ukti vistaraih |   
Avidyaantargataih yatnah kartavyah taata shobhane ||*** Enough of the endeavours to acquire and rule over a kingdom, and *artha **shaastra*, etc. One should put effort to learn the *aatma vidyaa*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tat iti | Drushtaarambhaah raajyaadi artha udyogaah, teshaam ukti   
vistaraih artha shaastraakhyaih avidyaantargataih vidyaayaam   
antargataani vidyaasthaanaani, tat itaraih | Shobhane parama   
mangala aatma vidyaa vishaye shaastre |*** *Drushtaarambhaah* means whatever endeavours we pursue, in order to acquire the kingdom, to rule over the kingdom, wealth; *ukti vistara* is  [[590]] the *artha shaastra*, which explain in detail how to acquire and rule over the kingdom, how to conquer enemies, how to maintain friendship; enough of all those things. There are fourteen *Vidyaa Sthaanaas* told, those which are not included in these will become *avidyaa*. One has to put effort to learn the *aatma vidyaa shaastra*, which is nothing but *Vedaanta*; they cause the utmost good. *Aatma vidyaa* is *parama mangala*. One has to put effort to acquire knowledge about the *aatman*. Other things are all said to be *avidyaa*.* **Angaani vedaah chatvaarah meemaamsa nyaaya vistarah | **Puraanam dharma shaastram cha vidyaah hi etaah chaturdashaah ||* Fourteen *Vidyaa Sthaanaas* are told - four *Vedaas*, six *Angaas *\( *Shikshaa **Vyaakaranam Chandah Niruktam Jyotisham Kalpa*\), *Poorva **Meemaamsa* and *Uttara Meemaamsa, Nyaaya shaastra, Puraanaas, Dharma **Shaastra*. 



*Puraanaas* explain the meanings of *Vedaanga*. *Dharma shaastraas* explain meanings of the *Poorva Kaanda* of *Vedaas, yajnyaas*, etc. *Artha shaastra* and others are not included in this. ***   


## 40
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 40:    
Vidyaa buddhih avidyaayaam ajnyaanaat taata jaayate |   
Baalo agnim kim na khadyotam asureshvara manyate ||*** O father, one will think that *avidyaa* itself is *vidyaa*, because of ignorance. A boy who is ignorant, on seeing a firefly, will think that it is fire itself. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Nanu artha shaastraadeh raajyaadi upaaya jnyaapakatvaat katham   
avidyaasthaanatvam tatra aaha vidyaa iti | Artha shaastraadi janya   
vidyaayaah tu alpa asthira phala saadhanatvaat vidyaatvam naasti iti   
bhaavah | ****Artha shaastra* and other things are helping one to rule over the kingdom, how can they be called as *avidyaa sthaanaas*, is explained here. *Vidyaa* has to lead to *sthira nirantara phala*. Those which lead to *asthira alpa phala*, they are not included as *vidyaa*, is told here. 





## 41
 [[591]] The next *shloka* is the most wonderful essence of everything. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 41:    
Tat karma yat na bandhaaya saa vidyaa yaa vimuktaye |   
Aayaasaaya aparam karma vidyaa anyaa shilpa naipunam || ***What are the *karmaas* which one should do, and what *vidyaa* one should learn? One should do those acts which will not bind one to *samsaara*, which does not lead one to bondage; all other things are not *karma*, one should not even do those acts. That which will lead one to liberation, can only be told as *vidyaa*; all others are *avidyaa* only. All other *karmaas* that one does, is all simply exhaustion only, nothing else; it is of no use. All other *vidyaas* are also getting expertise in useless things. 



What is the knowledge which one should acquire? That knowledge which will lead one to liberation. 



What are the acts that one should do? Those which will not bind one. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kaa tarhi vidyaa? Tatra aaha tat karma iti | Yaa vimuktaye saa   
vidyaa, artha shaastraadi vidyaa shilpa naipunam | Yat na bandhaaya,   
api tu vidyaa angatvena mokshaaya tat karma; aparam karma pravrutti   
karma | ***Then what is *vidyaa*, if *artha shaastra* and others are said to be *avidyaa*? They are only means to attain *alpa asthira phalaas*; they are simply getting expertise in some actions which are of no use. That which does not bind one, but being an accessory of *vidyaa*, leads to *moksha*, liberation; that only is *karma*. The remaining karma becomes *pravrutti karma*, in order to gain worldly benefits. ***   


## 42
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 42:    
Tat etat avagamya aham asaaram saaram uttamam |   
Nishaamaya mahaabhaaga pranipatya braveemi te ||*** Having learnt and understood that whatever I have learnt - this *Neeti **Shaastra*, and others - are all *asaara*, of no use. Listen to me, I will tell you the most essential knowledge that one should acquire. I bow down to you and will tell you this.  [[592]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Karma niroopanam praasangikam; raajyaadi drushta phala arthinaa api   
tat saadhane dharme yatitavyam na neeti shaastraadou iti aaha tat   
etat ityaadibhih | Tat etat neeti shaastraadi janya jnyaanaadi;   
nishaamya shrunu | ***The aspects of *karma* are told here incidentally. Even by one who desires kingdom and such fruits that are obtained here itself, effort should be put towards dharma which is the means to emancipation and not in *neeti **shaastra* and such means. *Tat etat* means the knowledge acquired by study of *Neeti Shaastra* and such is *asaara*, please listen to what is *saara*. 





## 43
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 43:    
Na chintayati ko raajyam ko dhanam na abhivaancchati |   
Tathaa api bhaavyam eva etat ubhayam praapyate naraih || ***Who does not think of ruling over a kingdom, who does not desire to acquire wealth? Whether you desire to become a king or emperor, or you want to acquire lot of money and wealth; if you have done some *karmaas* in your earlier life, if you are destined to get that, only then you will get; otherwise you will never get. One will only get whatever one is destined to get. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na iti | Bhaavyam praak karmato bhaavi | Ubhayam raajyam dhanam   
cha | ****Bhaavya* means that which comes as a result of previous *karma. **Ubhayam* means kingdom and wealth. ***   


## 44
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 44:    
Sarva eva mahaabhaaga mahatvam prati sodyamaah |   
Tathaapi pumsaam bhaagyaani na udyamaah bhooti hetavah ||*** Everyone puts a lot of effort to attain greatness, to acquire a lot of wealth. Even then, just putting mere effort will not lead one to acquire wealth, but if they are destined to get, that fate only will decide. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sarva eva iti | Mahatvam aishvaryam |*** [[593]] 





## 45
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 45:    
Jadanaam avivekaanaam ashooraanaam api prabho |   
Bhaagya bhojyaani raajyaani santi aneetimataam api || ***It can be seen that those who are dullards, those who are ignorant, those who have no valour, they also acquire a lot of good things, they also get a kingdom, they enjoy lot of wealth, even those not on the right path. 



Just by putting effort one cannot be assured. Previous *karmaas* decide the fate. 





## 46
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 46:    
Tasmaat yateta punyeshu ya icchet mahateem shriyam |   
Yatitavyam samatve cha nirvaanam api cha icchataa || ***One has to do virtuous deeds, if he wants lot of wealth and other things of greatness. One who desires liberation, he should put effort to acquire *samatvam*. 



*Samatvam yoga uchyate* is told in *Bhagavad Geetha*. In the *Geetha **Bhaashya* it was told as *aatma aatma saamya, aatma Paramaatma saamya*. Everyone is *sama* because *Bhagavaan* is *aatma* to everyone. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tasmaat iti | Samatve bhagavat aatmakatvena sarvasya samatva   
buddhou | ***All are equal or similar because all are having *Paramaatman* as their inner controller, inner self. There is nothing which is not *bhagavat aatmaka*. Developing such an equanimity of mind, will lead to liberation. 





## 47
Here, *Prahlaada* says the most essential teaching. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 47:    
Devaah manushyaah pashavah pakshi vruksha sareesrupaah |   
Roopam etat anantasya vishnoh bhinnam iva sthitam ||*** We are seeing all these things here, *devaas, manushyaas, pashus*, birds, trees, serpents - all these are forms of *Vishnu*, as though they are present as separated.  [[594]] 



These are all forms of Vishnu only. But they are seen as separated. We see a tree separately, an animal separately, a man separately, etc. as though present distinctly. But, they are all *Ananta's roopa* only, *Vishnu's* forms. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Devaa iti | Bhinnam iva tatah pruthak bhootam iva | Ananta iva tat tat   
roopena sthita iti jnyaapanam eva samyak \* neha naanaasti kinchana \*   
na tat asti vinaa \* iti cha |*** *Vishnu* is only present in all these forms, this is what is the right understanding. *Shruti* says - there is no multiplicity. It is not that there is *bhagavat aatmaka* and there is *abhagavat aatmaka*; everything is *bhagavat aatmaka*. Everything is having only *Paramaatman* as the *aatman*. Krishna says ' *Na tat asti vinaa yat syaat mayaa bhootam charaacharam*' - movables and immovables which are not having Me as the inner self, does not exist. Everything is *bhagavat aatmaka* only. All these forms, though seen as separate, are all forms of Vishnu only, who is all pervasive, and existing as inner controller of everything. 





## 48
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 48:    
Etat vijaanataa sarvam jagat sthaavara jangamam |   
Drashtavayam aatmavat vishnuh yato ayam vishvaroopadhruk || ***One who has realized this, all this world consisting of immovables and movables, Vishnu only is existing everywhere. This *Vishnu*, is the only One who is having all forms in this entire world we see. He is the *Vishva roopa*. 



Just like He is inner controller of me, He is inner controller of everything else. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Etat iti | Aatmavat antaryaaminaa paramaatmanaa yuktam | Matup   
antam etat | Atra hetuh yato ayam vishvaroopadhruk iti |   
   


## 49
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 49:    
Evam jnyaate sa bhagavaan anaadih parameshvarah |   
Praseedati achyutah tasmin prasanne klesha samkshayah ||*** [[595]] If one realizes this, *Bhagavaan* who is *anaadi*, does not have a beginning, the Supreme Lord, *Parameshvara; Achyuta* will be very pleased and graces such a person who realizes this. If *Bhagavaan* is pleased and graces such a one, all his difficulties will get destroyed. 



This is what *Prahlaada* tells *Hiranyakashipu*, that this is the truth and essential knowledge that one should acquire. That is why he sees that what he has learnt in the *raaja neeti, artha shaastra* is not the right knowledge, and it is *avidyaa*. He tells what is *vidyaa*, the *uttama saara* that one has to acquire and realize. 



Again, *Hiranyakashipu* gets very angry, and does some more bad things to *Prahlaada*, which we will see next. 





## 50
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 50:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Etat shrutvaa ati kopena samutthaaya varaasanaat |   
Hiranyakashipuh putram padaa vakshasi ataadayat ||*** *Sri Paraashara *- Having heard what *Prahlaada* said, *Hiranyakashipu* got up from his throne and kicked his son's chest with his foot. 





## 51
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 51:    
Uvaacha cha sa kopena saamarshah prajvalan iva |   


## 52
Nishpishya paaninaa paanim hantukaamo jagat yathaa ||*** And he spoke as though burning with great anger and intolerance and hitting his hand with the other fisted as though he wanted to kill everyone in the whole world.* ****Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 52:    
He viprachitte he raaho he balaisha mahaarnave |   
Naaga paashaih dhrudhaih baddhvaa kshipyataam maa vilambyataam   
||*** He called his servants O *Viprachitti*, O *Raahu*, O *Bala*\! Let this boy be bound with strong *naaga paasha* and be thrown into the great ocean, without delay. 





## 53
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 53:    
Anyathaa sakalaa lokaah tathaa daiteya daanavaah |   
Anuyaasyanti moodhasya matam asya duraatmanah ||***  [[596]] Otherwise, all worlds and the *daityas* and *daanavas* will start following his teachings of this stupid and wicked boy. 





## 54
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 54:    
Bahusho vaarito asmaabhih ayam paapah tathaa api areh |   
Stutim karoti dushtaanaam vadha \(paksha\) eva upakaarakah ||*** In spite of being told not to do in many ways, he wicked boy is only praising our enemy. So killing the wicked is only going to be helpful. 





## 55
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 55:    
Tatah te satvaraa daityaa baddhvaa tam naaga bandhanaih |   
Bhartuh aajnyaam puraskrutya chikshipuh salila arnave ||*** Then the *daitya* servants hurriedly bound *Prahlaada* with *Naaga paasha* threw him in the waters of the ocean following the orders of their master. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tata iti | Salila arnave arnava salile |*** The word *salila-arnave* means *arnava salile *- waters of the ocean. 





## 56
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 56:    
Tatah chachaala chalataa prahlaadena mahaa aarnavah |   
Udvelo abhoot param kshobham upteya sa samantatah ||*** Then as *Prahlaada* moved, the entire ocean got stirred. And all round the ocean waters were agitated greatly. 





## 57
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 57:    
Bhoolokam akhilam drushtvaa plaavyamaanam mahaa ambhasaa |   
Hiranyakashipuh daityaan idam aaha mahaamate ||*** O *Maitreya*, then seeing that the whole earth was getting flooded with the waters of the ocean which was agitated, *Hiranyakashipu* told the *daityaas* thus. 





## 58
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 58:    
Daiteyaah sakalaih shailaih atra eva varunaalaye |   
Niscchidraih sarvatah sarvaih cheeyataam esha durmatih ||*** Oh *daiteyaas*, let this boy be covered completely without any gap with great number of boulders here in the ocean itself. Let this wicked boy be covered fully. 





## 59
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 59:    
Na agnih dahati na eva ayam shastraih cchinno na cha uragaih |   
Kshayam neeto na vaatena na vishena na krutyayaa ||***  [[597]] Fire does not burn him, he was not harmed by weapons, the serpents did not do any harm to him, neither *vaayu* nor poison could kill him. And even by *Krutya* he could not be harmed. 





## 60
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 60:    
Na maayaabhih na cha eva ucchaat paatito na cha diggajaih |   
Baalo ati dushta chitto ayam na anena arthoi asti jeevataa ||*** Even *Shambaraasura's maayaas* could not harm him and falling from the big mountain also he was unharmed. Even *Diggajas* could not kill him. This boy is very wicked and there is no meaning in his living. 





## 61
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 61:    
Tat esha toya madhye tu samaakraanto maheedharaih |   
Tishtatu abdha sahasraantam praanaan haasyati durmatih ||*** And thus being covered completely by huge boulders let this boy stay in the ocean for a thousand years and then this wicked minded boy will die. 





## 62
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 62:    
Tato daityaa daanavaah cha parvataih tam mahodadhou |   
Aakramya chayanam chakruh yojanaani sahasrashah ||*** Then the *daityaas* and *daanavaas* covered him completely with mountains and huge boulders in the ocean for thousands of *yojanaas*. 





## 63
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 63:    
Sa chitah parvataih antah samudrasya mahaamatih |   
Tushtou aahnika velaayaam ekaagra matih achyutam || ***Inside the ocean, this great minded, wise person *Prahlaada*, completely covered by huge boulders. The time during which *aaraadhanaa* is to be done to *Bhagavaan*, approaches and he starts to pray to *Bhagavaan*, sensing that the time has come to perform *aaraadhana* of *Bhagavaan*. Completely focussed on, single mindedly meditating on *Achyuta*, he starts to pray to Him. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sa iti | Aahnika velaayaam ahni kriyamaana aaraadhana velaayaam | ****Aahnika velaa* is the time during the day during which *aaraadhana* is performed to Vishnu. 





## 64
This is the *Prahlaada Stuti*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 64:    
Prahlaadah -*** [[598]] ***Namaste pundareekaaksha namaste purushottama |   
Namaste sarva lokaatman namaste tigma chakrine || ***O Lotus eyed Lord, to You, I do *namaskaara*. O *Purushottama*, I pay obeisance to You. To One who is the inner controller of all the worlds, One who has the *Sudarshana Chakra* having sharp edges, I do *namaskaara*. 



***\(Namaste vaasudevaaya namaste karunaakara |   
Namaste vishvaroopaaya namaste sarva moortaye ||\) ***To *Vaasudeva*, to *Karunaakara*, to *Vishvaroopa*, the One who is present as this entire world, to One who has everything as His form, I do *namaskaara*. 





## 65
This is a very famous *shloka*. During *Sandhyaavandana* during morning, afternoon and evening, during *upasthaana*, we tell this *shloka* everyday. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 65:    
Namo brahmanya devaaya go braahmana hitaaya cha |   
Jagat hitaaya krishnaaya govindaaya namo namah || ***To One who does good to those who are learning and reciting *Vedaas*, those who are engaged in *tapas*, and the cows and *Brahmins*, to One who does good to the entire world, who is *Krishna, Govinda*, I do *namaskaara*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Nama iti | Brahmanya devaaya tapo vedaadi hitaaya devaaya | ***One who does good to *tapas, Veda*. 





## 66
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 66:    
Brahmatve srujate vishvam sthitou paalayate punah |   
Rudra roopaaya kalpaante namastubhyam trimoortaye || ***He only is present as *trimoortis*, *Brahma, Vishnu* and *Rudra*, being the *antaryaami* of *Chaturmukha Brahma*, creating the world; He Himself does *avataara* as *Vishnu*, He is present to sustain this world, He protects the world; taking on the form of *Rudra*, being the *antaryaami* of *Rudra*, He does *samhaara*, at the end of the *kalpa*; I do *namaskaara* to You who is present in the three forms. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Brahmatva iti | Sthitou svaroopena avasthitou | ***





## 67
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 67:    
Devaah yakshaah suraah siddhaah naagaah gandharva kinnaraah |   
Pischaachaa raakshasaah cha eva manushyaah pashavah tathaa || ***The *Devaas, Yakshaas, Suraas, Siddhaas, Naagaas, Gandharvaas, Kinnaraas, **Pishaachaas, Raakshasas*, humans, animals, ...  [[599]] 





## 68
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 68:    
Pakshinah sthaavaraah cha eva pipeelika sareesrupaah |   
Bhoomi aapo agnih nabho vaayuh shabdah sparshah tathaa rasah || ***... birds, mountains and immovables, ants, serpents, *pruthivi, apas, tejas, **aakaasha* and *vaayu*, their qualities *shabda, sparsha, roopa, rasa, gandha*, ... 





## 69
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 69:    
Roopam gandho mano buddhih aatmaa kaalah tathaa gunaah |   
Eteshaam paramaarthah cha sarvam etat tvam achyuta || ***... *manas, buddhi, mahat, ahamkaara*, time, and the qualities *gunaas*, not only these but also the *jeevaatman* who is there in all these things, all of these are You only, O *Achyuta*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Roopam iti | Aatmaa ahamkaarah; eteshaam paramaarthah eteshaam   
sambandhi avinaashi jeevaatmaa | Etat drusham jagat cha tvam | ***The *jeevaatman* who is imperishable, who is associated with all these things. 





## 70
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 70:    
Vidyaa avidye bhavaan satyam asatyam tvam visha amrute |   
Pravruttam cha nivruttam cha karma vedoditam bhavaan || ***You are only *vidyaa*, You are only *avidyaa*, You are only *satya, asatya, visha, **amruta*, and all the *karmaas* told in the *Vedaas, pravrutti **karmaas* and *nivrutti karmaas*. Everything is You only, all are controlled by You only; all these *karmaas* are also Your worship only. 



*Pravrutti karmaas* are those *karmaas* performing which one gains the worldly pleasures. *Nivrutti karmaas* are those performing which one gets liberation. 





## 71
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 71:    
Samasta karma bhoktaa cha karma upakaranaani cha |   
Tvam eva vishno sarvaani sarva karma phalam cha yat || ***You are only the One worshipped through all the *karmaas*, You are the object of worship of all the *karmaas*, You are all the instruments associated with the *karmaas*, You are the bestower of all the fruits of karma, You are the ultimate enjoyer also, You are only everything. 



It is told in *Bhagavad Geetha - Aham sarvasya karmasya bhoktaa cha* [[600]] *prabhureva cha. Bhoktaa* is *aaraadhya*, object of worship, and *prabhu* is *phala prada*, One who gives the fruits. 



*Brahma arpanam brahma havih brahmaagnou brahmanaa hutam | **Brahma eva gantavyam brahma karma samaadhinaa || *





## 72
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 72:    
Mayi anyatra tathaa ashesha bhooteshu bhuvaneshu cha |   
Tava eva vyaaptih aishvarya guna samsoochakee prabho || ***You are present in Me, You are present in all the beings, and all the worlds. You are only all pervading. You are only inner controller of all these things. All these things show Your *aishwarya, guna*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Mayi iti | Aishvarya guna samsoochakee upaadaana nimittatva   
lakshanam aishvaryam, guno jnyaana shakti aadih, tayoh soochikaa | ***You are the material cause of everything *upaadaana kaarana*, and You are also the efficient cause also *nimitta kaarana*, this is Your *aishwarya*, You are Supreme Lord and owning all these, Your qualities are *jnyaana shakti bala **aishwarya veerya tejas*, all these things indicate Your *aishwarya* and *guna*. 







## 73
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 73:    
Tvaam yoginah chintayanti tvaam yajanti cha yaajakaah |   
Havyakavya bhuk ekah tvam pitru deva svaroopadhruk || ****Yogis* meditate upon You. Those who perform *yajnya yaagaas*, they worship You only, You are only in the form of *pitrus, devaas*, etc., You only receive what is offered in the *pitru yajynaas, shraadhaaas*, \( *havya* is given to *devaas*, and *kavya* is given to *pitrus*\). You are only the one worshipped ultimately being the *antaryaami*. You are only taking on the forms of *pitrus* and *devaas*, being *antaryaami* of all of them. 





## 74
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 74:    
Roopam mahat te sthitam atra vishvam tatah cha sookshmam jagat etat   
esha |   
Roopaani sookshmaani cha bhoota bhedaah teshu antaraatmaakhyam   
ateeva sookshmam || ****Prahlaada* is eulogizing *Bhagavaan's* wonderful *divya mangala vigraha*. 



In this *Amsha*, in the last chapter, there is a section called *Astra Bhooshana **Adhyaaya*. In this, all of this is present as His *astra* and *bhooshana*, is going to be told.  [[601]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na hi aneeshvarasya agunasya cha vyaaptih sambhavati | Astra   
bhooshana roopa nikhila aadhaaram shubha aashrayatayaa   
vakshyamaanam divya roopam aaha roopam iti | Te mahat roopam asti   
iti anushangah | Mahatvam svaroopato gunatah cha | Etat vishvam   
jagat sookshmam yatra tishthati yatah cha bhavati | Yatah cha   
sookshmam iti cha paatah | Roopaani sookshmaani avyakta mahat   
aadeeni | Bhoota bhedaah pruthivi aadayah | Antaraatmaakhyam   
aatma tattvam | Etaani cha yato yatra; vishvam iti sankshepa uktih,   
roopaani iti vistara uktih | ***You are only all pervading, You have *aishwarya* and *guna*; these show Your *aishwarya* and *guna* only. One who does not have *aishwarya* and does not have *gunaas*, cannot be all pervading like this. Everything is present as His weapons and ornaments. One who is supporting everything in the form of *astraas* and *bhooshanaas*. His *divya mangala vigraha* is called *Shubhaashraya - shubha* and also *aashraya* to everything. You have a wonderful magnanimous form where the *mahatva* is in *svaroopa* and *guna* both. For the word *Brahma* also, the *bruhatva* is *svaroopatah* and *gunatah*. His huge form is all pervading in *svaroopa* also, and His *gunaas* are also *ananta*, each *guna* is *ananta*. This whole world, subtle world, is established in whom, and is also created from whom. You have a huge form, which is *divya mangala vigraha*, in You essential nature also, You have unending, incomparable *svaroopa* and *gunaas*. This whole world, in subtle form is existing in You. In the manifest and unmanifest forms, is existing in You, and is also created from You only. Those who are very subtle, *avyakta, mahat, **ahamkaara, tanmaatraas* which are present during *samashti srushti **avasthaa*, are told here. *Bhoota bhedaah* means the five elements -*pruthivi, apas, tejas, vaayu, aakaasha*. In all these, there is an *antaryaami*, who is very subtle. All these, and also the various elements, are also created from whom, and established in whom. 



Earlier it is told as *vishvam*, this is a short form, *sankshepa*, in one word. This is expanded in detail as *roopaani sookshmaani, bhoota bhedaah*. Told as *vishvam* is also You only, and told as various elements is also You only. You are *antaryaami* of all that. ***   


## 75
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 75:    
Tasmaat cha sookshmaadi visheshanaanaam agochare yat paramaatma   
roopam |*** [[602]] ***Kim api achintyam tava roopam asti tasmai namaste purushottamaaya   
||*** What is seen outside is Your *divya mangala vigraha*, and what is superior to that is Your essential nature, *divya aatma svaroopa*. That which is subtle than all these various manifest forms. It cannot be seen by anyone. That form of yours is unimaginable, and one cannot say that it is like this. To that form, I pay obeisance, O *Purushottama*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Divya aatma svaroopam aaha tasmaat iti | Tasmaat param iti sheshah   
| Paramaartha roopam parama prayojana roopam | Yat paramaatma   
roopam iti cha paathah | Roopam svaroopam |*** After having told about His wonderful form, His essential nature, *svaroopa* is told. ***   


## 76
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 76:    
Sarva bhooteshu sarvaatman yaa shaktih aparaa tava |   
Gunaashrayaa namah tasyai shaashvataayai sureshvara ||*** Having told that *Bhagavaan* is only present as *avyakta, mahat, ahamkaara*, the various elements, etc., and also the *divya aatma svaroopa, Prahlaada* is eulogizing Him as present as inner controller of the bound selves, and the liberated selves. The *muktaatma svaroopa* is told as His *paraa shakti*, and *baddha aatma* is told as *aparaa shakti*. In all the beings, embodied selves, O controller of all, that which is abode to all the *trigunaas, sattva, **rajas, tamas*, to that form of Yours, I pay obeisance to. 



In the *shaastraas*, the word *bhoota* is used to denote an embodied self. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kshetrajnya roopam mukta roopam cha aaha sarva bhooteshu iti   
dvaabhyaam | Sarva bhooteshu iti | Gunaah sattvaadayah aashrayo   
yasyaah saa gunaashrayaa; aparaa mukta apekshayaa nikrushtaa | ***You are present as inner controller of bound and liberated selves. Compared to the liberated selves, the *baddhaas* are inferior, therefore they are called as *aparaa*. 





## 77
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 77:    
Yaa ateeta gocharaa vaachaam manasaam cha avisheshanaa |   
Jnyaani jnyaana paricchedyaa taam vande cha aishvareem paraam || ***Which cannot be imagined by anyone, cannot be seen by anyone, through words and mind, that which cannot be explained in words, and which cannot  [[603]] be thought in mind, very superior, it can only be known through knowledge of *jnyaanis*, I bow down. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yaa ateeta gocharaa iti | Eeshvareem svatantraam, \* sa svaraat   
bhavati iti shrutih | Paraam utkrushtaam | Etat shakti dvayam, vishnu   
shaktih paraa proktaa ityaadinaa vakshyate | Taam vande cha   
eeshvaraam paraam iti cha paathah | ***The *mukta svaroopa* is also told as *eeshvareem paraam*, One which is independent; everything is *paratantra*, and *Bhagavaan* only is *svatantra*, and how can *mukta svaroopa* be told as *eeshvareem*, this is explained here; when the bound self gets liberated, getting rid of its *karma **bandha*, *Shruti* says that he gets *karma svaatantrya*, he gets freed from the bondage of *karma*, that is why he is told as *svatantra, svaraat*. There is a *shloka* which comes later, which says His *paraa shakti, aparaa shakti; **shakti* also has a meaning of *shareera*. ***   


## 78
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 78:    
Om namo vaasudevaaya tasmai bhagavate sadaa |   
Vyatiriktam na yaasyaasti vyatirikto akhilasya yah ||*** I always pay obeisance to that *Vaasudeva, Bhagavaan*; everything is *bhagavat aatmaka*, there is nothing which is separated from *Bhagavaan*, He is present as inner controller and inner self of everything. *Prahlaada* prays to *Vishnu* with the *Dvaadashaakshara mantra*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Om nama iti | Om ityaadi mantrasya arthah triteeya shashtayoh   
vakshyate | Vyatiriktam na yasya asti sarvasya tat aatmakatvaat |   
Vyatirikto akhilasya yah kaarya bhootaat jagato vyatiriktah | \* Ato   
jyaayaan \* tripaadoordhva udait purushah \* yasya ayuta ayuta amsha   
amshe \* iti | Vyatiriktam ityaadinaa vaasudeva shabdaarthah uktah | ***In the later *amshaas*, it is going to be told the meanings of this *mantra*. He is different from everything, He is the cause and the world is the effect; in this way, He is different from the world which is the effect. The *Purusha **Sookta mantraas* are told here - He is superior to the world, ten thousandth part of a ten thousandth part is this world \( *ayuta* means ten thousand\), everything is controlled through His *sankalpa* itself. He stays in everything as *antaryaami*, and is different and distinct. 



*Sarvatra asou vasati samastam cha atra vasati*, everything lives in Him, and He lives in everything, and He is different and distinct from everything, He  [[604]] is untouched by the defects of all these, and everything is inseparably associated with Him, and He is inner controller. He is the supporter. Everything is meant for His use, and He is the master who enjoys everything. He is the ultimate enjoyer and bestower of all fruits. Everything is also present in such a way that nothing is present independent of Him. Everything is dependent on Him. There is nothing which is not *brahmaatmaka*. 





## 79
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 79:    
Namah tasmai namah tasmai namah tasmai mahaatmane |   
Naama roopam na yasya asti yo astitvena na upalabhyate || ***I do *namaskaara* to Him, that *mahaatman*. He does not have name and form, He is there and present all the time. He cannot be told as only this form or this name. He is present in all names and in all forms, in any *prakaara*. 



*Apakshaya vinaashaabhyaam parinaamarddhi janmatah varjitah shakyate **vaktum yah sadaa asti iti kevalam*, will come later. The *shat bhaava **vikaaraas* present for everyone, *asti *\(is present\), *jaayate *\(gets born\), *vardhate *\(grows\), *viparinamate *\(gets modified\), *apaksheeyate *\(deteriorates\), *nashyati *\(gets destroyed\); *Bhagavaan* does not have any of these. If these *shat bhaava **vikaaraas* are not there, how can anyone tell Him in any way? It is possible to tell, He is always present; that is the only way in which He can be told. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Namah iti | Aadaraat namaskaara aavruttih; sankarshana aadi vyooha   
vishayaa vaa | Naama roopam na yasya jeevavat na karma krutam | ***The repetition shows *aadara*, great respect. Again and again he is doing *namaskaara*. Or, it can also be interpreted as *Sankarshana, **Pradyumna* and *Aniruddha*, as told three times. 





## 80
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 80:    
Yasya avataara roopaani samarchanti divoukasah |   
Apashyantah param roopam namah tasmai mahaatmane || ***All the forms where He manifests here, as *avataaraas*, and all the gods see Him, they worship Him in all these forms, not able to see His para *roopa*, to that *Bhagavaan*, to that *Mahaatman*, I do *namaskaara*. 





## 81
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 81:    
Yo antah tishthan asheshasya pashyati eeshah shubha ashubham |   
Tam sarva saakshinam vishnum namaste parameshvaram ||*** [[605]] Being present inside everything, directly seeing all the good and bad things that all the beings are doing all the time, that *Parameshvara*, Supreme Lord Vishnu, I do *namaskaara*. 



*Yah pruthivyaam tishthan pruthivyaa antarah yam pruthivi na veda yo **agnou tishthan ya aatmani tishthan ... * 



*Varuno yaati madhye satya anrute avapashyan janaanaam*. He is seeing all the good and bad things that all beings are doing, every moment, He is present inside the heart seeing all these things. Nobody can escape Him. 



*Saakshi* means *saakshaat drashtari sanjnyaayaam*, He is directly seeing everything. ***   


## 82
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 82:    
Namo astu vishnave tasmai yasya abhinnam idam jagat |   
Dhyeyah sa jagataam aadyah sa praseedatu me avyayah ||*** This world is not different from Him. He is only present in all these forms. All these are His modes. One who is present before this whole world, He is the sole creator, He is the *jagat kaarana*. The cause of this whole world - is to be meditated upon. That immutable one, let Him be pleased with me. 



*Shruti* says *Kaaranam tu dhyeyah* - who is to be meditated upon, *kascha **dhyeyah*, is the question posed, and the answer given is *kaaranam tu **dhyeyah *- the One who is the cause of this universe - is to be meditated upon. Because if one has to escape from this world, one has to take refuge in the Creator only. Only the Creator can make someone get out of this creation. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Namo astu iti | Yasya abhinnam kaaryatvaad roopavatvaat cha |*** World is not different from HIM due to being effect and having a form. 





## 83
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 83:    
Yatrotam etat protam cha vishvam akshara samjyake |   
Aadhaara bhootah sarvasya sa praseedatu me harih || ***Everything is woven like the warp and weft in a cloth, the cross-wise and length-wise threads, the way they are woven, in this way, everything is woven in Him. He is called *akshara*, He is the support of everything. Let Him be pleased with me. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** [[606]] ***Yatra iti | Yatra etat vishvam otam kunda iva, protam sootre   
maniganaa iva \* brahman sa vishvaa bhootaani naaveeva antah   
samaahitaah \* sootre maniganaa iva iti cha |*** Everything is interwoven like the warp and weft in a cloth; it is told in the *Geetha* that *sootre maniganaa iva*. In the *Shruti, Taittiriya Braahmana*, it is told that the whole world is placed in *Bhagavaan*. There is a nice example as to how it is placed, when someone travels by ship or boat, everything, people and things are loaded onto that, and place inside. Just like this, the sentients and non-sentients are placed in *Bhagavaan*. 



When crossing over the ocean, all the *chetana* and *achetana*, people and things, are kept inside the ship. In the same way, the whole world of sentients and insentients are all placed in *Paramaatman*, it is said. 





## 84
The next *shloka* is a wonderful *shloka* quoted by our *aachaaryaas*, and it shows *Prahlaada's* way of meditation. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 84:    
Om namo vishnave tasmai namah tasmai punah punah |   
Yatra sarvam yatah sarvam yah sarvam sarva samshrayah || ****Prahlaada* prays to Vishnu with the *Vishnu Shadakshara mantra*, again and again I pay obeisance to Him. Everything is established in whom, and everything is created from whom, one who is everything, He is the abode of everything. To Him, I pay obeisance. 





***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying *Prahlaada Charitam*, about how *Prahlaada* started to worship, meditate upon *Paramaatman* during the *aaraadhana kaala*, inside the ocean when he was completely covered with huge boulders. He started to pray to *Bhagavaan* sensing that the time of *aaraadhana* has come. 





## 83
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 83:    
Yatrotam etat protam cha vishvam akshara samjyake |   
Aadhaara bhootah sarvasya sa praseedatu me harih || ***Just as this whole world is woven in Him, like the warp and weft threads of a cloth, widthwise and lengthwise threads in a loom, all the entities in this world are residing in *Paramaatman*. He is known as *akshara*. He is the support of everything; that *Hari*, let Him be pleased with me. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yatra iti | Yatra etat vishvam otam kunda iva, protam sootre   
maniganaa iva \* brahman sa vishvaa bhootaani naaveeva antah*** [[607]] ***samaahitaah \* sootre maniganaa iva iti cha |*** 





## 84
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 84:    
Om namo vishnave tasmai namah tasmai punah punah |   
Yatra sarvam yatah sarvam yah sarvam sarva samshrayah || ***I bow down to that *Vishnu*. Again and again, I prostrate unto Him. Everything is existing in Him, everything is created from Him only, He is only everything. Everything emanates from Him, He only creates everything. He is only present in all these forms, being the *antaryaami*. He is the refuge for everything. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Om iti | Yatra sarvam sthitam leenam iti vaa, yatah sarvam   
upaadaanabhootaat bhavati, ata eva yah sarvam |*** During *pralaya*, everything goes and merges unto Him. He is the material cause of everything, everything is created from Him. He is the sole cause, He is the material cause. Because He is the material cause, everything is Him only. 





## 85
This is the wonderful experience of *Prahlaada* that we see here. What is told in the *Upanishads* as *Ahamgrahopaasana*, he experiences that. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 85:    
Sarva gatvaat anantasya sa eva aham avasthitah |   
Mattah sarvam aham sarvam mayi sarvam sanaatane || ***One who is present in everything as the inner self, He is *Ananta*. I am also present as Him only. Everything is created from Me only. I am only everything. Everything is existing in Me. 



*Shruti* says *Satyam jnyaanam anantam brahma*. He has *desha kaala vastu **pariccheda raahitya*; He is present in all objects at all times, in all places. There is no place where He is not there. There is no object in which He is not there. There is no time in which He is not there. He is all pervading. 



This is *Ahamgrahopaasana*, as *Nammaazhvaar* also says. *Rishi **Vaamadeva* also experiences this, as told in the *Upanishads. **Prahlaada* experiences *Vishnu* in himself. This is an ' *Aham Brahmaasmi*' kind of experience. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sarva gatvaat iti | Sarvatah sarvatra aatmatvena yo vasati | Anaadi   
madhya antam ityaadi visheshanaih rachitah jadaat yo vyaavruttah   
sacchidaananda svaroopah sa eva aham avasthita iti atra anantasya*** [[608]] ***sarva gatatvam hetuh | ****Bhagavaan* does not have beginning, or middle or end. He is present all the time. One who is different and distinct from inert objects, non sentient objects. He is *Sat, Chit, Aananda svaroopa*. He is *jnyaana aananda svaroopa*, always present. He is present in me, *brahmaatmakatvena*, He is inner self of me also. How he is experiencing this is because *Ananta* is all pervading, present everywhere. *Prahlaada* is experiencing the all pervasiveness of *Paramaatman*. 





## 86
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 19, Shloka 86:    
Aham eva akshayo nityah paramaatmaa aatma samshrayah |   
Brahma samjyo aham eva agre tathaa ante cha parah pumaan || ***Everything is taking refuge in Him. He is refuge for everything. He does not have any other support. He is present in Himself. He Himself is support for Himself. Before *srushti* also, I am *Brahmaatmaka*, after *pralaya* also. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aham eva iti | Sa paramaatmaa kim aashraya iti atra aaha - aatma   
samshraya iti | Na kinchit aashritah, sve mahimni pratishtitah | Nanu   
brahmano jagat utpattih shrooyate \* yato vaa imaani \* ityaadinaa; tat   
katham matta iti uchyate | Tatra aaha brahma samjnyo aham iti |   
Brahma aatmakatvaat aham eva brahma samjyah | Agre srushteh praak   
| Ante pralaye |*** He is not depending on anything. He is the support of Himself. He exists by Himself. The *Upanishad* says ' *Yato vaa imaani bhootaani jaayante, yena **jaataani jeevanti*' - from Whom this whole world is created, all these beings are created, and all these live because of Whom; sustenance and everything is from *Paramaatman* only. How can *Prahlaada* say that 'Everything is created from me' when the *Upanishad* says that everything is created from *Brahman*? Everything is created from *Brahman*. The answer is that 'I am called as *Brahma*', this is *Brahmaatmakatva*. Because I have *Brahman* as my *aatman*, I myself can be called as *Brahma. Prahlaada* is experiencing *Paramaatman* as the *antaryaami*, and he is doing that *anusandhaana*. Everywhere *Paramaatman* is present as the inner self, and when one starts to meditate upon the *Brahmaatmakatva* of *Paramaatman*, they themselves will think as *Brahma*. This is the kind of experience called *Ahamgrahopaasana*. This is what *Prahlaada* experienced here. 



With this, Chapter Nineteen comes to an end. 



 [[609]] ***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Prathame Amshe Ekonavimshatitamo   
Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Iti Srhi Vishnu Chitteeye Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Prathame   
Amshe Akonavimshatitamo Adhyaayah || ***



***|| Atha Vimsho Adhyaayah ||*** 



Now the Twentieth Chapter.*** ***
