+++
title = "21"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 1:    
Prahlaada putra aayushmaan shibih baashkala eva cha |   
Virochanah tu prahlaadih balih jajnye virochanaat ||*** Progeny of *Kashyapa's* other wives, and *Maruts* is being told here. *Prahlaada's* sons are *Aayushmaan, Shibi, Baashkala* and *Virochana*. From *Virochana, Bali* was born. 



There are many *paathaantaraas*. In another *paatha*, it is *Samhlaada putra **aayushmaan*. ***   


## 2
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 2:    
Baleh putra shatam tu aaseet baana jyeshtam mahaa mune |   
Hiranyaaksha sutaah cha aasan sarva eva mahaabalaah ||*** *Bali* had hundred children. The eldest was *Baanaasura. Hiranyaaksha* also had many sons, and they were also mighty and very powerful. ***   


## 3
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 3:    
Jharjharah shakunih cha eva bhoota santaapanah tathaa |   
Mahaanaabho mahaabaahuh kaalanaabhah tathaa aparah ||*** *Hiranyaaksha's* sons are *Jharjhara, Shakuni, Bhoota Santaapana, **Mahaanaabha, Mahaabaahu, Kaalanaabha*.  [[625]] ***   


## 4
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 4:    
Abhavan danu putraah cha dvimoordhaa shambarah tathaa |   
Ayomukhah shankushiraah kapilah shankarah tathaa ||*** *Kashyapa* had another wife, *Danu - Dvimoordha, Shambara, Ayomukha, **Shankushira, Kapila, Shankara*, ... ***   


## 5
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 5:    
Ekachakro mahaabaahuh taarakah cha mahaabalah |   
Svarbhaanuh vrushaparvaa cha puloma cha mahaabalah ||*** *Ekachakra, Mahaabahu*, the mighty *Taaraka, Svarbhaanu, Vrushaparva, **Puloma* who was very powerful. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shishtaanaam kaashyapa streenaam vamshaan aaha abhavan iti | ***





## 6
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 6:    
Ete danoh sutaah khyaataa viprachittih cha veeryavaan || ***They are all well known as children of *Danu*, and also *Viprachitti*, who was of great valour. ***   


## 7
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 7:    
Svarbhaanoh tu prabhaa kanyaa sharmishtaa vaarshaparvanee |   
Upadaanee hayashiraah prakhyaataa varakanyakaah ||*** *Svarbhaanu* had a daughter by name *Prabhaa, Varshaparvan's* daughter is *Sharmishtaa. Upadaane* and *Hayashiraa* are also daughters of *Varshaparvan*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Svarbhaanoh iti | Sriharivamshe danuputra shate upadaanava   
vaishvaanarou uktou | Hayashiraa iti upadaanavyaa updaanava   
duhiturnaama | Hastishiraa iti cha paathah | Upadaanavee iti atra   
vruddhi abhaavah chaandasah | ***Among *Danu's* hundred children, *Upadaanavaas* and *Vaishvaanaraas* are told. *Upadaanavi's* daughter is *Hayashiraa*. According to grammar, it should have been *Oupadaanavee*. This is *Aarsha*, according to *Rishi prayoga*. ***   


## 8
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 8:    
Vaishvaanarasute cha ubhe pulomaa kaalakaa tathaa |   
Ubhe sute mahaabhaage mareecheh tu parigrahah ||*** *Vaishvaanara* had two daughters - *Puloma* and *Kaalakaa*. Both these daughters married *Mareechi*.  [[626]] ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vaishvaanara iti | Mareechih kashyapo daanava vishesho vaa |*** We can take it to be some *daanava* by name *Mareechi*. ***   


## 9
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 9:    
Taabhyaam putra sahasraani shashtih daanava sattamaah |   
Poulomaah kaalakeyaah cha mareechi tanayaah smrutaah ||*** *Puloma* and *Kaalakaa* had sixty thousand children. They are known as *Poulomaas* and *Kaalakeyaas*. ***   


## 10
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 10:    
Tato apare mahaaveeryaa daarunaah tu ati nirghrunaah |   
Simhikaayaam athaa utpanna viprachitteh sutaah tathaa ||*** *Simhikaa* is the sister of *Hiranyakashipu. Viprachitti* and *Simhikaa* had children of very great valour; they were all very powerful and mighty, with great valour, very wicked and very fierce and cruel. ***   


## 11
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 11:    
Tryamshah shalyah cha balavaan nabhah cha eva mahaabalah |   
Vaataapih namuchih cha eva ilvalah khasrumah tathaa ||*** *Tryamsha, Shalya* who was very powerful, *Nabha* who had mighty power, *Vaataapi, Namuchi, Ilvala, Khasruma*, ... ***   


## 12
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 12:    
Andhako narakah cha eva kaalanaabhah tathaa eva cha |   
Svarbhaanuh cha mahaaveeryo vaktrayodhee mahaa asurah ||*** *Andhaka, Naraka, Kaalanaabha, Svarbhaanu, Mahaaveerya, Vaktrayodhi*, were all very wicked and cruel children. 





## 13
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 13:    
Ete vai daanavaah sreshtaah danu vamsha vivardhanaah |   
Eteshaam putra poutraah cha shatasho atha sahasrashah || ***They were all great *daanavaas* who expanded the *vamsha* of *Danu*. Their children and grandchildren are hundreds and thousands. ***   


## 14
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 14:    
Prahlaadasya tu daityasya nivaata kavachaah kule |   
Samutpannaa sumahataa tapasaa bhaavitaatmanah ||*** In *Prahlaada's kula*, who had attained greatness, through great penance, tapas, who had directly perceived *Bhagavaan*, who was a realized soul, in his *kula, Nivaatakavachaas* were born.  [[627]] 





## 15
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 15:    
Shat sutaah sumahaa sattvaah taamraayaah parikeertitaah |   
Shukee shyenee cha bhaasee cha sugreevee shuchgrudrakaa || ****Taamra* had six sons, and they were all very great people. Six daughters were born - they were *Shukee, Shyenee, Bhaasee, Sugreevee, Shuchi, **Ghrudhrakaa*. 





## 16
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 16:    
Shukee shukaanajanayat ulookapratyalookakaan |   
Shyenee shyenaanstathaa bhaasee bhaasaan grudhraan cha grudhrakee   
|| ****Shukee* gave birth to parrots, owls and crows. *Shyenee* gave birth to hawks, *Bhaasaa* to kites, *Ghrudhrakaa* to vultures. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shukee iti | Ulookah koushikah, paryulookah kaakah, bhaasee   
bhaasaamscha |*** 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 17:    
Shuchoudakaan pakshiganaan sugreevee tu vyajaayata |   
Ashvaan ushtraan gardabhaan cha taamraavamshah prakeertitah ||*** *Shuchi* gave birth to the host of birds which live in water. From *Sugreevee*, the horses, camels and donkeys were born. This is the *Taamra vamsha*. ***   


## 18
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 18:    
Vinataayaah tu dvou putrou vikhyaatou garuda arunou |   
Suparnah patataam sreshtho daarunah pannagaashanah ||*** *Vinataa* gave birth to two sons - well known and famous as *Garuda* and *Aruna. Suparna* is known as the excellent among the birds, very fierce, and devouring all the snakes. ***   


## 19
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 19:    
Surasaayaam sahasram tu sarpaanaam amita oujasaam |   
Aneka shirasaam brahman khecharaanaam mahaatmanaam ||*** *Surasaa* gave birth to thousands of serpents, who were all of great *tejas*. They had many hoods. They were all flying in the air. ***   


## 20
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 20:    
Kaadraveyaah tu balinah sahasram amita oujasah |   
Suparna vashagaa brahman jajnyire naika mastakaah ||*** *Kadru's* children were all very powerful. They were in thousands, and all  [[628]] under the control of *Garuda*. They had many hoods. ***   


## 21
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 21:    
Teshaam pradhaana bhootaah tu shesha vaasuki takshakaah |   
Shankah shvetou mahaapadmah kambalaashvatarou tathaa ||*** Among the children of *Kadru*, the many hooded serpents, who were all under the control of *Suparna*, the well known ones are *Shesha, Vaasuki, **Takshaka, Shanka, Shveta, Mahaapadma, Kambala, Ashvatara*. ***   


## 22
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 22:    
Elaaputrah tathaa karnah kaarkotaka dhananjayou |   
Ete cha anye cha bahavo dandadhookaa visha ulbanaah ||*** *Elaaputra, Karna, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya *- they were *Kadru's* and *Sourasa's* children. They were fighting and were very venomous. Many serpents were born. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Elaaputra iti | Ete kaadravayaah souraseyaah cha anye bahavah   
dandashookaah visholbanaah ||   
   


## 23
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 23:    
Ganam krodhavasham viddhi tasyaah sarve cha damshtrinah |   
Sthalajaah pakshino abjaah cha daarunaah pishitaashanaah ||*** *Krodha* gave birth to the host of serpents which were very mighty, they lived on earth. Gave birth to birds, those living in water, they were all very fierce and eating flesh. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ganam iti | Te cha sarve sarpaah damshrtrinah | Tatra kaadraveya   
souraseyebhyo anyaan sarpaan maamsaadaan sthalajaan pakshinah cha   
jalajaan daarunaan cha krodhavamsham ganam krodhavashayaa   
vamsham viddhi | Krodhavasho ganah cchidraa \* Balo ganaat   
krodhavashaat aheendrah \* iti bhaagavata ukteh | \* Rakshoganam   
krodhavashaa sva naamaanam ajeejanat \* iti maatsyeya ukteh cha | ***





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 24:    
Krodhaa tu janayaamaasa pishaachaam cha mahaabalaan |   
Gaah tu vai janayaamaasa surabhih mahishee tathaa |   
Iraa vrukshalataa valleeh truna jaateeh cha sarvashah || ****Krodhaa* gave birth to *pishaachaas* who were very powerful. *Surabhi* gave birth to cows and buffaloes. *Iraa* gave birth to trees, twiners, climbers, and all the varieties of grasses.  [[629]] ***   


## 25
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 25:    
\(Vashaa\) Khashaa tu yaksha rakshaamsi munih apsarasah tathaa |   
Arishtaa tu mahaa sattvaan gandharvaan samajeejanat ||*** *Khashaa* gave birth to *yakshaas* and *raakshasaas. Muni* gave birth to *apsarasaas. Arishtaa* gave birth to *gandharvaas*, who were all very excellent ones. ***   


## 26
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 26:    
Ete kaashyapa daayaadaah keertitaah sthaanu jangamaah |   
Teshaam putraah cha poutraah cha shatasho atha sahasrashah ||*** These are all the progeny of *Kaashyapa*, the movables and immovables. Their children and grandchildren are in hundreds and thousands. 





## 27
**Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 27:  *****Esha manvantare sargo brahman svaarochishe smrutah ||***** **This is told to be the creation in *Svaarochisha Manvantara*, O *Maitreya*. ***   


## 28
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 28:    
Vaivasvate cha mahati vaarune vitate kratou |   
Juhvaanasya brahmano vai prajaa sarga iha uchyate ||*** Now the creation in *Vaivasvata Manvantara* is going to be told - how creation of beings was done. *Vaaruna yajnya* was done by none other than *Chaturmukha Brahma*, he was the *hotaa* in that *yajnya*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha vaivasvata manvantare prajaa sarga uchyata iti aaha - vaivasvata   
iti | ***





## 29
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 29:    
Poorvam yatra tu saptarsheen utpannaan eva maanasaan |   
Putratve kalpayaamaasa svayam eva pitaamahah |   
Gandharva bhogi devaanaam daanavaanaam cha sattama ||*** Earlier the *maanasa putraas* were created and *saptarshis* were created. *Pitaamaha* created them as his children. *Gandharvaas*, serpents, *devaas, daanavaas* were created. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Poorvam ityaadi | Gandharvaadeenaam poorvam utpannaan praak   
manvantarasthaan saptarsheen eva vartamaana vaaruna yajnya   
avicchedaaya yatra manvantare prajaa sargaartham putratve   
kalpayaamaasa tatra prajaa sarga uchyata iti poorvena anvayah | *** [[630]] ***Pitrutve kalpayaamaasa iti paathe gandharvaadeenaam pitrutve   
srashtatva ityarthah |*** *Gandharvaas* and others who were born earlier itself, and *saptarshis* who were there before this *Manvantara*, this *Vaaruna yajnya* which has to continue, and again he makes them to be born as sons, that *prajaa sarga* is told here. ***   


## 30
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 30:    
Ditih vinashta putraa vai toshayaamaasa kaashyapam |   
Tayaa cha aaraadhitah samyak kaashyapah tapataam varah ||*** At that time, *Diti* loses her children and pleases *Kaashyapa*, her husband. *Kaashyapa* who was a great sage was being pleased and worshipped by *Diti*. ***   


## 31
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 31:    
Varena cchandayaamaasa saa cha vavre tato varam |   
Putram indravadhaarthaaya samartham amita oujasam ||*** He becomes very pleased and tells her to seek some boon from me, as I am very pleased with your service. She says that she wants to have a son who is very capable and of great valour, who will kill *Indra*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Varena ityaadi | Varam dadaami iti aashvaasitavaan |*** 





## 32
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 32:    
Sa cha tasyai varam praadaat bhaaryaayai muni sattamah |   
Dattva cha varam avyagrah kaashyapah taam uvaacha ha || ****Kaashyapa* gave that boon to his wife, *Diti. Kaashyapa* having given her that boon, he tells her thus. ***   


## 33
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 33:    
Shakram putro nihantaa te yadi garbham sharad shatam |   
Samaahitaa atiprayataa shouchinee dhaarayishyasi ||*** If you maintain a pleased mind all the time, with whatever *shaastra **shuddhi* is said, maintain purity of mind and body, for hundred seasons, then you will be pregnant with a son who is going to kill Indra. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shakram iti | Shouchinee maatsya ukta shouchavatee | Tatra hi uktam \*   
Sandhyaayaam na eva bhoktavyam garbhinyaa varavarnini | Na   
sthaatavyam na gantavyam vruksha mooleshu sarvadaa || Varjayet   
kalaham loke gaatra bhangam tathaa eva cha | Na unmukta keshee *** [[631]] ***tishtet cha na ashuchih syaat kadaachana || iti | Shuchinee   
dhaarayishyasi iti cha paathah |*** *Kaashyapa* says that *Diti* has to maintain the *shaastra shuchi* which is required. These are the *shuchis* told in *Maatsya Puraana*- in *Sandhyaa **kaala* one who is pregnant should not eat, and should not stand near a tree, should not fight unnecessarily, should not make faces to others, should not let the hair loose and stand like that, should always be pure and clean, should keep their body pure, these are several types of purity told. ***   


## 34
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 34:    
Iti evam uktvaa taam deveem sangatah kashyapo munih |   
Dadhaara cha saa cha tam garbham samyak shoucha samanvitaa ||*** *Kashyapa* unites with her, telling thus. She is maintaining all the purity that is required, and she becomes pregnant, as told by the *muni*. ***   


## 35
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 35:    
Garbham aatmavadhaarthaya jnyaatvaa tam maghavaan api |   
Shushrooshuh taam atha aagacchat vinayaat amaraadhipah ||*** *Indra* comes to know that she is going to have a son who is going to kill him. With great *vinaya*, the king of gods wants to do all kinds of service to her, he comes sincerely. ***   


## 36
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 36:    
Tasyaaschaivaantara prepsuh atishthat paaka shaasanah |   
Oone varsha shate cha asyaa dadarshaantaram aatmavaan ||*** When he was doing all kinds of service to *Diti*, he waits for a time when she is not maintaining the right *shuchi*, and a little less than a hundred years, he saw that one day, ... ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tasyaah cha iti | Oone asamaapta kaale ||*** 





## 37
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 37:    
Akrutvaa paadayoh shoucham ditih shayanam aavishat |   
Nidraam cha aahaarayaamaasa tasyaah kukshim pravishya sah || ***... and one day, without cleaning her feet, she goes to bed, which is against the *shaastra shuchi* told. She fell asleep not being *shuchi* and at that time, he enters into her womb. ***   


## 38
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 38:    
Vajra paanih mahaa garbham chiccheda atha sa saptadhaa |   
Sa paathyamaano vajrena praruroda ati daarunam ||***  [[632]] Holding his *Vajra aayudha*, he breaks that womb into seven parts. Being hit by that *Vajra aayudha*, that *garbha* started to cry loudly. ***   


## 39
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 39:    
Maa rodeeriti tam shakrah punah punah abhaashata |   
So abhavat saptadhaa garbhah tam indrah kupitah punah ||*** He tells again and again to that *garbha*, 'Do not cry' and that fetus gets broken into seven parts, and getting angry, *Indra* again tells. 





## 40
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 40:    
Ekaikam saptadhaa chakre vajrena adrividaarinaa |   
Maaruto naama devaah te babhoovuh ati veginah ||*** Getting angry, again breaks each piece into seven pieces, using the *Vajra*, which is as powerful as to break a huge mountain itself. Each one became seven parts further. These forty nine parts became *devaas* by name *Maruts*. They could move around with great speed. 





## 41
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 21, Shloka 41:    
Yat uktam vai maghavataa tena eva maruto abhavan |   
Devaa ekonapanchaashat sahaayaa vajrapaaninah ||*** As said by *Indra*, they became *Maruts*, as he said ' *Maa rodih, maa rodih*'. They were forty nine *devaas* and they became assistants to *Indra* himself. 



This is the story of how *Diti* wants to have a son to kill Indra, while Indra is waiting for a chance, and breaks the fetus into forty nine pieces, and they become his assistants and become well known as *Marut gana*. 



This completes the Twenty First Chapter. 



***|| Atha Dvaavimsho Adhyaayah ||*** 



Now Chapter Twenty Two. 



Now, *Pruthu's* ruling the kingdom, and how he established all the leaders, or rulers, the various aspects of creation, are going to be told. *** ***
