+++
title = "22"

+++


## 1
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 1:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Yadaa abhishiktasya pruthuh poorvam raajye maharshibhih | *** [[633]] ***Tatah kramena raajyaani dadou loka pitaamahah ||*** When *Pruthu* became the king, when all the *maharshis* made him the king earlier, and all the various kingdoms to rule over the various parts, *Chaturmukha Brahma* gave powers to various people. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha pitaamahah pruthoh abhisheka uttaram poorva srushtaanaam   
aadhipatya vibhaagam tat tat maryaadaa sthaapanaartham akarot iti   
aaha yadaa iti | Tatah kaalaat aarabhya | ****Chaturmukha Brahma* establishes all the various rulers, and he gives them powers to rule over, and be the *adhishthaana devataas* of the various aspects. After the *abhisheka* of *Pruthu*, those who were created earlier, how they were put into command of various things, is going to be told. He established the boundaries for each one to rule over. This is going to be told now - from that time onwards. 





## 2
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 2:    
Nakshatra graha vipraanaam veerudhaam cha api asheshatah |   
Somam raajye nyaghaat brahmaa yajnyaanaam tapasaam api || ****Soma* was made the king of *nakshatraas, grahaas* and all the *brahmins*, all the herbs and trees, and *yajnya* as well as tapas. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Nakshatra iti | Raajye aadhipatye |*** *Raajye* means, to rule over. 





## 3
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 3:    
Raajnyaam vaishravanam raajye jalaanaam varunam tathaa |   
Aadityaanaam patim vishnum vasoonaam atha paavakam || ***For all the kings, *Vaishravana* became the king. For all waters, *Varuna* became the king. For the *Dvaadasha Aadityaas, **Vishnu* became the ruler or head. For all the *Vasus, Paavaka* became the head. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Raajnyaam iti | Vishnum indraanujam | *** [[634]] 





## 4
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 4: ***** *****Prajaapateenaam daksham tu vaasavam marutaam api |***** *****Daityaanaam daanavaanaam cha prahlaadam adhipam dadou ||***** **For all *Prajaapatis, Daksha* became the head. For the *Marut ganaas, **Indra* became the head. For *Daityaas* and *Daanavaas, Prahlaada* became the king. ***   


## 5
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 5:    
Pitruunaam dharmaraajaanam yamam raajye abhyashechayat |   
Airaavatam gajendraanaam asheshaanaam patim dadou ||*** *Yama* who is the king of *Dharma*, became the head of all the *Pitrus. **Airaavata* became the head of all elephants. ***   


## 6
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 6:    
Patatrinaam cha garudam \(naagaanaam api vaasukim\) devaanaam api   
vaasavam |   
Ucchaishravasam ashvaanaam vrushabham tu gavaam api ||*** *Garuda* became the head of all the birds. *Indra* became the head of all the gods. *Vaasuki* became the head of the *Naagaas*. For all the horses, *Ucchaishravas* became the head. For all the cows, *Vrushaba* became the head. ***   


## 7
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 7:    
Mrugaanaam cha eva sarveshaam raajye simham dadou prabhuh |   
Shesham tu danda shookaanaam akarot patim avyayah ||*** For the kingdom of the animals, lion became the king. *Shesha Naaga* became the king of all the serpents which bite. ***   


## 8
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 8:    
Himaalayam sthaavaraanaam muneenaam kapilam munim |   
Nakhinaam damshtrinaam cha eva mrugaanaam vyaaghram eeshvaram   
||*** For all the immovables, mountains, etc., *Himaalaya* became the king. *Kapila* became the head of all the *munis*. Tiger became the head of all animals which had claws and biting teeth.  [[635]] ***   


## 9
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 9:    
Vanaspateenaam raajaanam plakshameva abhyashechayat |   
Evam eva anya jaateenaam praadhaanyena akarot prabhoon ||*** *Plaksha* became the king of all the trees. In the same way, for other classes also, those who are very prominent in that class became the head of that class. 



This is how *Chaturmukha Brahma* divided the creation, and established heads of various classes. 





## 10
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 10:    
Evam vibhajya raajyaani dishaam paalaan anantaram |   
Prajaapati patih brahmaa sthaapayaamaasa sarvatah || ***Thus, having divided the entire kingdom among all these various people, he established the *dik paalakaas*, those who are maintaining the various directions. Brahma who is the head of all *Prajaapatis*, established the *dik **paalakaas*. 





## 11
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 11:    
Poorvasyaam dishi raajaanam vairaajasya prajaapateh |   
Dishaapaalam sudhanvaanam sutam vai so abhyashechayat || ***For the Eastern direction, he made *Sudhanva* as the head, or *dik paalaka. **Sudhanva* was *Vairaaja Prajaapati's* son. ***   


## 12
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 12:    
Dakshinasyaam dishi tathaa kardamasya prajaapateh |   
Putram shankapadam naama raajaanam so abhyashechayat ||*** For the South direction, *Kardama Prajaapati's* son *Shankapada* was made the head, *dik paalaka*. ***   


## 13
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 13:    
Paschimasyaam dishi tathaa rajasah putram achyutam |   
Ketumantam mahaatmaanam raajaanam so abhyashechayat ||*** For the Western direction, he made *Ketumaan*, son of *Rajasa Prajaapati*, as the head.  [[636]] ***   


## 14
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 14:    
Tathaa hiranya romaanam parjanyasya prajaapateh |   
Udeechyaam dishi durdharsham raajaanam abhyashechayat ||*** *Hiranya Roma* who is the son of *Parjanya Prajaapati*, was made the head of the Northern direction. ***   


## 15
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 15:    
Taih iyam pruthivi sarvaa sapta dveepaa \(sukaananaa\) sapattanaa |   
Yathaa pradesham adya api dharmatah paripaalyate ||*** The entire universe having seven islands, along with all its cities and towns, even today, these are the *dik paalakaas* and others who are ruling over, following dharma as told in the *Shaastraas*. 





## 16
*Sri Paraasharar* tells that this entire thing is *Bhagavaan's vibhooti* or glory only. He is only the Supreme Ruler, Lord of everything. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 16:    
Ete sarve pravruttasya sthitou vishnoh mahaatmanah |   
Vibhooti bhootaa raajaano ye cha anye munisattama ||*** O *Maitreya*, excellent among the sages, all these people are the *vibhooti* of *Vishnu*, who is the greatest and overlord of everything. He is the One who is maintaining, sustaining everything. All those which have been told here, and anyone else also. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ete iti | Ye cha ayne kaashyapa aadyaah |*** 





## 17
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 17:    
Ye bhavishyanti ye bhootaah sarva bhooteshvaraa dvija |   
Te sarve sarva bhootasya vishnoh amsha samudbhavaah || ***Those who are established now, those who are going to come in future, those who were present in the past, all of them are born out of the *amsha* of *Vishnu* only. 



*Amsha Amshi bhaava* is told. *Bhagavaan Vishnu* is the *Amshi*, and all are His *amsha. Bhaashyakaarar* establishes *visheshana amsha* and *visheshya* [[637]] *amsha*, in *Sri Bhaashya*, in *Amshaadhikarana. Amsha* implies *shareera **shareeri bhaava. Amsha* means that they are all His *shareera*, His *vibhooti*, His *tanu*, His *vapu*. 





## 18
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 18:    
Ye tu deva adhipatayo ye cha daityaadhipaah tathaa |   
Daanavaanaam cha ye naathaa ye naathaah pishitaashinaam || ***Those who are the heads of all gods, the rulers of the *daityaas *\( *Diti's* children\) also, and also the *daanavaas *\( *Danu's* children\), the heads of those who eat *maamsa*, flesh eaters, ... 





## 19
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 19:    
Pashoonaam ye cha patayah patayo ye cha pakshinaam |   
Manushyaanaam cha patayo naagaanaam adhipaah cha ye || ***... those who are the heads of all the *pashus*, animals, those who are lords of birds, the kings of all the humans, the heads of all the serpents, ... ***   


## 20
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 20:    
Vrukshaanaam parvataanaam cha grahaanaam cha api ye adhipaah |   
Ateetaa vartamaanaah cha ye bhavishyanti cha apare |   
Te sarve sarva bhootasya vishnoh amsha samudbhavaah ||*** ... the heads of the trees, mountains, planets, the heads of all these - those who were earlier there in the past, those who are present now, and those who are going to come as heads of these in future - all of them without leaving anyone, are all born out of *Vishnu's amsha* only. Because *Vishnu* is *sarva bhoota*, He is everything, everywhere, all pervading, He is present as Inner Controller of everyone. They are all inseparably associated with *Vishnu*, they are all the *shareera* of *Vishnu*. There is *apruthaksiddha sambandha* with *Vishnu*. All are controlled by *Vishnu*, all are existing for the purpose of serving *Vishnu*, all are supported by *Vishnu*. ***   


## 21
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 21:    
Na hi paalana saamarthyam rute sarveshvaram harim |   
Sthitam sthitou mahaa praajnya bhavati anyasya kasyachit ||*** In sustaining or protecting everything, nobody has the capability to sustain or support of protect everything, except *Vishnu*. It is impossible for anyone  [[638]] else to protect or sustain all these things, but for the Supreme Lord *Hari*, who is always established in the good of everything. It is impossible for anyone else to have this kind of capability. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Na hi iti | Paalana saamarthye sarveshvaratvam hetuh |*** ***   


## 22
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 22:    
Srujati esha jagat srushtou sthitou paati sanaatanah |   
Hanti cha eva antakatvena rajas sattva aadi samshrayah ||*** When the creation of the world happens, *Hari* only is the one who creates. Regarding the sustenance aspect, He is the one who sustains everything. He is always there, though He is old, He is new. Withdrawing everything unto Himself, He only does as an *antaka*, in the form of *Yama* who does *samhaara* of everything, taking the support of *rajas, sattva* and *tamas*, the *gunaas*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Paalanavat srushti samhaarayoh api tasya eva saamarthyam iti aaha -   
srujati iti |*** Why is *Hari* said to be the only one capable of protecting? Because He is the Supreme Lord of everything. Just like He protects everything, He only creates, sustains, withdraws during *pralaya*. 





## 23
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 23:    
Chaturvibhaagah samsrushtou chaturdhaa samsthitah sthitou |   
Pralayam cha karoti ante chaturbhedo janaardanah ||*** The four forms of *Janaardana* through which He does creation, sustenance and dissolution, are going to be told. During creation, He is present in four different forms. During sustenance also, He is present in four different forms. He does dissolution being present in four different forms. 





## 24
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 24:    
Ekena amshena brahmaa asou bhavati avyakta moortimaan |   
Mareechimishraah patayah prajaanaam cha anyabhaagatah || ***In one part, He becomes *Chaturmukha Brahma* himself, in creation. He only  [[639]] is present as *Mareechi* and other *prajaapatis*, during creation. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ekena iti | Avyakta moortimaan avyakta svaroopah | Mareechimishraah   
mareechi sahitaah | ***He is present in unmanifest form. 





## 25
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 25:    
Kaalah truteeyah tasya amshah sarvabhootaani cha aparah |   
Ittham chaturdhaa samsrushtou vartate asou rajogunah || ***In the third part, He is *kaala*. All the beings that are created are the fourth part of *Janaardana*. Having abundance of *rajas guna*, He does creation. At that time, He Himself is present as *Chaturmukha Brahma, Mareechi* and other *Prajaapatis, Kaala*, and all the beings that are created. He is inner controller of everything and everything is His *amsha* only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kaalah iti | Rajo gune yasya cha rajogunah | ***





## 26
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 26:    
Ekaamshena sthito vishnuh karoti paripaalanam |   
Manu aadi roopah cha anyena kaala roopo aparena cha ||*** During sustenance, in one form, He is present as *Vishnu*. The second part of His is *Manu* and other forms, who are responsible for the sustenance part of it. *Kaala* is the third part. 





## 27
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 27:    
Sarva bhooteshu cha anyena samsthitah kurute sthitim |   
Sattvam gunam samaashritya jagatah purushottamah || ***In another part, He is present in all beings, because everyone is taking part in sustenance in some way or other. *Bhagavaan Purushottama* takes resort to *Sattva guna*, and *sattva* is more during sustenance. 





## 28
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 28:    
Aashritya tamaso vruttim anta kaale tathaa prabhuh |   
Rudra svaroopo bhagavaan ekaamshena bhavati ajah || *** [[640]] During dissolution, He takes resort to *tamo guna*. He is present as *Rudra* as one form. ***   


## 29
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 29:    
Agni antaka aadi roopena bhaagena anyena vartate |   
Kaala svaroopo bhaago anyah sarva bhootaani cha aparah ||*** The second form of dissolution is *Agni* and *Yama*. Third part is *kaala*. Fourth part is all beings. 





## 30
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 30:    
Vinaasham kurvatah tasya chaturddhaivam mahaatmanah |   
Vibhaaga kalpanaa brahman kathyate sarvakaalikeem ||*** Destruction or dissolution is happening all the time. And there is a *praakruta **pralaya* also at some point. In one form, He is present as *Rudra* who does *samhaara*, second form is *Agni* and *Yama*, third form is *kaala*, and fourth form is all the beings. This kind of division is happening in every *kalpa*. In every *kalpa*, there are *Manvantaraas; Chaturmukha **Brahma* does the creation, *prajaapatis* are created, and all beings are in some way or other part of creation, sustenance and dissolution - these are happening in every *kalpa*. 



The gist is that during creation, sustenance or dissolution, *Vishnu* only is present in various forms. When we say that *Chaturmukha Brahma* did the creation, *Manu* did the sustenance, or that *Kaala* is responsible for all these, and that the beings are responsible in some way for all these things, all of these are actually happening by *Vishnu* only, being present in these forms as the Inner Controller, *antaryaami*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vinaasham iti | Saarvakaalikee pratikalpa bhaavinee | ***





## 31
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 31:    
Brahmaa daksha aadayah kaalah tathaa eva akhila jantavah |   
Vibhootayo hareh etaah jagatah srushti hetavah || ***All these are the *vibhooti* or glory of *Vishnu* only; *Chaturmukha Brahma, **Daksha*, and others are responsible for creation, *kaala*, time, and all the  [[641]] beings - they are also doing creation at their own level. They are the cause of creation of this world. ***   


## 32
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 32:    
Vishnuh manu aadayah kaalah sarva bhootaani cha dvija |   
Sthiteh nimitta bhootasya vishnoh etaah vibhootayah ||*** In the same way, for sustenance, *Vishnu* is responsible, *Manu* and others are also responsible, *kaala*, and all the beings are responsible. They are all the *amshaas* of *Bhagavaan* only. They are all the *vibhootis* of *Vishnu. **Haris* present as Inner Controller, *antaryaami* of all these, and He only gets all these done through them; they are responsible to do that, but the ultimate controller is *Bhagavaan* only. 



He is present in *Brahma, Vishnu* and *Maheshvara* and as *Vishnu* Himself. 





## 33
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 33:    
Rudrah kaala antakaadyaah cha samastaah cha eva jantavah |   
Chaturdhaa pralayaaya etaa janaardhana vibhootayah ||*** For *pralaya*, dissolution, *Rudra, kaala, Yama* and *Agni*, and all the beings, are the four parts. These are the *vibhootis* of *Bhagavaan* only, who are established in dissolution or destruction. 





## 34
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 34:    
Jagat aadou tathaa madhye srushtih aapralayaat dvija |   
Dhaatraa mareechih mishraih cha kriyate jantubhih tathaa ||*** At the beginning of the world, in the middle also, up to *pralaya*, creation is going on happening. This is happening by *Chaturmukha Brahma*, *Mareechi*, and the *Prajaapatis*, and also by all the beings. 



After *praakruta pralaya*, when creation happens, when the world is created newly, and from there, creation keeps on happening every *kalpa*, every *manvantara*, and is going on happening all the time. 





## 35
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 35:    
Brahmaa srujati aadikaale mareechi pramukhaah tatah |   
Utpaadayanti apatyaani jantavah cha pratikshanam || *** [[642]] At the very beginning of the *kalpa, Chaturmukha Brahma* does creation. After that, *Mareechi* and *prajaapatis* are established in creation. They create children. And the beings are creating every minute, every second. Every second someone is born. 



At the beginning of the *praakruta pralaya, Chaturmukha Brahma* is created. Every *kalpa* is like a day for *Chaturmukha Brahma*. 





## 36
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 36:    
Kaalena na vinaa brahmaa srushti nishpaadako dvija |   
Na prajaapatayah sarve na cha eva akhila jantavah ||*** *Kaala* is an important aspect of creation. Without *kaala's* help, either *Chaturmukha Brahma* or *Prajaapati* or all the beings - nobody can do creation. It all has to happen at a particular time. Time controls how long one stays, lives. At the end of their time, which is specified based on their karma, they have to die. 





## 37
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 37:    
Evam eva vibhaago ayam sthitou api upadishyate |   
Chaturdhaa tasya devasya maitreya pralaye tathaa ||*** In the same way, the divisions are all happening for sustenance also. In the same way, in four forms, *Rudra, Agni/Yama, Kaala*, and all the beings, dissolution is also happening all the time. 



Four broad divisions are told. *Chaturmukha Brahma* is the first to start creation. *Prajaapatis* play a vital role in creation; they have a lot of powers and capability. *Kaala* is an important part for everyone. And, all the beings are also there. In the same way, sustenance is happening by *Vishnu, **Manu* and others, *Kaala* and also all the beings. Destruction is happening by *Rudra, Agni/Yama, Kaala* and then all the beings. These are all *vibhootis* of *Vishnu*, the glory, *shareera* of *Vishnu*. Through them, *Vishnu* only is getting all these done. 





## 38
Having told that everything is *Bhagavaan's vibhooti*, now a very generic statement is told by *Paraasharar*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 38:  *** [[643]] ***Yat kinchit srujyate yena sattva jaatena vai dvija |   
Tasya srujyasya sambhootou tat sarvam vai hareh tanuh ||*** Whatever is created by whoever, that act of creation, and the thing that is created, everything is *Paramaatman's tanu, shareera*. 



This is one of the main *pramaanaas* for the *Shareera Shareeri bhaava*. This is quoted by *Bhaashyakaarar* and other *Aachaaryaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Etat uktam bhavati iti aaha - yat kinchit iti | Sambhootou iti nimitta   
saptami | Kaarya utpatti nimittam hi kaarana adhishtaanena hareh tat   
tat tanutvam |*** Here, *Sri Engal Aalwaan* also tells like *Bhaashyakaarar *- Having told a lot of things, things are told in summary. Everything is *Hari's* body, is told. How everything becomes His *shareera*, is because *Bhagavaan* is *antaryaami* of the *kaarana*, cause also. *Bhagavaan* is Inner Self, locus, Inner Controller of every cause. He gets creation done through those people being their *antaryaami*. For the sake of creating the effect, He is present as the locus, the cause. Because *Hari* is present as *antaryaami* of everything, everything becomes His *shareera, tanu*. 



*Etat uktam bhavati *- is a typical style of *Bhaashyakaarar*, in *Sri Bhaashya*. Whatever is summarized is expanded sometimes, or, whatever is told in great detail is summarized briefly. *Vistrutasya sangrahah. Sangraheetasya **vistaarah. * 





## 39
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 39:    
Hanti yaavat cha yat kinchit sattvam sthaavara jangamam |   
Janaardanasya tat roudram maitreya antakaram vapuh ||*** Whoever destroys or kills anything, whether movable or immovable, that *roudra* form of whatever is responsible for destruction, whether it is *Rudra, Agni/Yama*, or a particular being, it is the *roudra **roopa* of *Hari* only. *Bhagavaan* only is *antaryaami* of everything, so everything is said to be His *shareera, tanu, vapu*. 





## 40
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 40:  *** [[644]] ***Evam esha jagat srushtaa jagat paataa tathaa jagat |   
Jagat bhakshayitaa devah samastasya janaardanah || ***In this way, *Janaardana* is the creator of everything, He is the protector, He is responsible for dissolution, He eats everything, He keeps everything in Himself and protects it as a part of Him, inseparably associated with Him. He is none other than *Janaardana*. 



*Aazhvaar* very clearly says that He swallows and He again throws it out. This symbolically tells that He withdraws everything unto Himself, protects during *pralaya*, and again He creates. Everything is present in subtle form during *pralaya*, and comes to gross state during creation. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Evam iti | Samastasya devo janaardanah iti anvayah |*** 





## 41
Now, *Paraasharar* starts to tell about *mukta svaroopa*. ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 41:    
Srushti sthiti antakaaleshu tridhaa evam sampravartate |   
Gunapravruttyaa paramam padam tasyaagunam mahat ||*** *Srushti, sthiti* and *anta *- it is happening in these three ways. In each of these, there are four forms. Through *sattva, rajas* and *tamas*. When *sattva* is high, He is responsible for sustenance. When *rajas* is high, creation happens. When *tamas* is high, destruction or dissolution happens. Due to the effects of the various *gunaas*, creation, sustenance and destruction happen. Everything is His *shareera, vibhooti*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Triguna vashyam roopam nigamayati srushti sthiti iti aarabhya guna   
pravrutti iti antena | Srushti iti | Srushti aadi kaaleshu guna   
pravruttyaa tridhaa bhootah, evam ukta prakaarena chaturbhedo   
vartate | Paramam ityaadi | Paramam virinchaadi padaat | Agunam   
gunamaya prakruti viyuktam | Mahat avyaktaat | Sarga sthiti   
antakaaleshu iti cha paathah |*** These are the forms of *Bhagavaan* which are under the sway of *triguna - **sattva, rajas, tamas. Chaturmukha Brahma* is also *trigunaatmaka. **Manu*, *Daksha prajaapatis, Yama, Agni *- all are *trigunaatmaka. Hari* being  [[645]] the *antaryaami*, all these denote the *antaryaami* also. Words which denote the *shareera* go up to the *shareeri* in *aparyavasaana vrutti*. All these *chetanaas* are *triguna vashyaas*. Though they are the *shareera* of Him, their defects don't touch Him. It is established in the *Vedaas* that He is *apahata paapma*. He is present as inseparably associated. Everything is His mode. It can be said that everything is Him only. *Srushti, sthiti* and *naasha* - are the three states. In these three states, He is present in four different forms. That was told so far, and is concluded here. It is superior to *Chaturmukha Brahma* and the *devaas. Aguna* means not that it is without any attribute or quality, but that it is separated from the three qualities of *prakruti, sattva, rajas* and *tamas*. It is superior to unmanifest or *avyakta*. 





## 42
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 42:    
Tat cha jnyaanamayam vyaapi sva samvedyam \(noo\) anoupamam |   
Chatushprakaaram tat api svaroopam paramaatmanah || ***It is abundance of consciousness. Pervading is through consciousness. It is self revealed. This *pada*, which is attained, is *mukta svaroopa*. This is also told as *Paramaatma svaroopa* because it is also a *visheshana* of *Paramaatman* only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tat cha iti | Jnyaanamayam jnyaana prachuram | Vyaapi jnyaanena |   
Sva samvedyam svayam prakaasham | Evam bhootam yat padam |   
Padyate iti padam mukta svaroopam | Tat cha chatushprakaaram | Tat   
api tasya paramaatmanah svaroopam iti anvayah | Atra svaroopa   
shabdo roopa vachanah | Svam roopam hi svaroopam | ***Abundance of consciousness. *Mayat pratyaya* is in *praachurya*, abundance. Here, *Paramapada* told is *mukta svaroopa*, the essential nature of *mukta*. This is also of four forms. *Mukta svaroopa* is *jnyaanamaya*, it has abundance of consciousness; it is *vyaapi*, it is all pervading due to attributive consciousness; it is *sva samvedya*, it knows itself, it reveals to itself; it is *anoupamam*, incomparable. 



*Paramapada* is a word used to describe three different things. One is *Paramaatman. Padyate iti padam *- that which is attained.  [[646]] A *mukta* attains *Paramaatman*; he goes to *Paramapada* and then attains *Paramaatman. Paramapada* is also a *sthaana*, the abode of *Vishnu. **Mukta svaroopa* is also *Paramapada*, because the *jeevaatman* attains his original full form, which is also a thing that he attains. This is also explained in *Vedaartha Sangraha* by *Bhaashyakaarar. Roopa* is also *paryaapa **pada* for *shareera. Vapu, tanu, shareera, roopa, amsha, vibhooti *- are all *paryaaya padaas*, they all denote *shareera shareeri bhaava* which is explained by *Bhaashyakaarar* very clearly. 



*Shareera shareeri bhaava* has three relationships - *aadhaara-aadheya, **niyaamaka-niyaamya, sheshi-shesha. Shareera* is told in various *pramaanaas, **Shrutis, Smrutis*, using various words - *amsha, vibhooti, vapu, roopa, tanu, **shareera*. 



Now, *Maitreyar* asks about those four forms 



***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying the last chapter of *Amsha* 1, Chapter 22, where *Paraasharar* is telling how everything is *Bhagavaan's roopa, Vishnu's* form only. *Vishnu* only is present as everything, whatever is created, everything is His *shareera*, depending on Him, supported by Him, and ruled by Him. Here, the words *tanu, vapu* are used, and everything is *Bhagavaan's shareera*, as per the *shareera shareeri **bhaava*, very clearly established by *Bhagavad Ramanuja* and our *poorva **aachaaryaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Triguna vashyam roopam nigamayati srushti sthiti iti aarabhya guna   
pravrutti iti antena | Srushti iti | Srushti aadi kaaleshu guna   
pravruttyaa tridhaa bhootah, evam ukta prakaarena chaturbhedo   
vartate | Paramam ityaadi | Paramam virinchaadi padaat | Agunam   
gunamaya prakruti viyuktam | Mahat avyaktaat | Sarga sthiti   
antakaaleshu iti cha paathah |*** The forms of *Bhagavaan* present in *prakruti mandala*, due to the *karma*, being associated with *prakruti*, which is *triguna*, associated with *sattva, **rajas, tamas*. That form having concluded, *Paraasharar* now starts to tell  [[647]] about the *mukta aatma svaroopa*. 





## 42
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 42:    
Tat cha jnyaanamayam vyaapi sva samvedyam \(noo\) anoupamam |   
Chatushprakaaram tat api svaroopam paramaatmanah ||*** Having told that everything that is created, that is coming under creation is *Bhagavaan's roopa* only, His form, *shareera, Paraasharar* continues to say that even the *mukta aatma svaroopa*, the essential nature of liberated self, is also *Bhagavaan's* form only. *Paramaatman* is only present in this form. The *mukta aatma svaroopa* is also His *prakaara* being His *shareera* only. It is present in four modes - *chatushprakaara*. This *mukta aatma svaroopa* can know itself. *Jeevaatman* has knowership. *Vyaapi* means that in the liberated state, it is all pervading with respect to the *dharma bhoota jnyaana*. It is *jnyaana prachura*, with abundance of consciousness. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tat cha iti | Jnyaanamayam jnyaana prachuram | Vyaapi jnyaanena |   
Sva samvedyam svayam prakaasham | Evam bhootam yat padam |   
Padyate iti padam mukta svaroopam | Tat cha chatushprakaaram | Tat   
api tasya paramaatmanah svaroopam iti anvayah | Atra svaroopa   
shabdo roopa vachanah | Svam roopam hi svaroopam | ***



Now, *Maitreyar* asks *Sri Paraasharar* to explain the four *prakaaraas*. 





## 43
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 43:    
Maitreyah -   
Chatushprakaarataam tasya \(jnyaana\) brahma bhootasya vai mune |   
Mamaachakshva yathaanyaayam yat uktam param padam ||*** *Maitreya *- The four forms - which is also a *Paramaatman's* form, the *mukta **svaroopa*, which is attained by the *jeevaatmans* when they get dissociated from *prakruti*, when they will be present in their original form, when the *dharma bhoota jnyaana* is in its original state. That is of four stages or modes. 



In this world, whatever we desire to possess, accomplish, that object which we desire to accomplish is the *saadhya*, goal to be accomplished; *saadhya* is  [[648]] that which is achieved or attained. The means to acquire that goal is called *saadhana*. The *saadhya* and *saadhana* are of several varieties, based on the desire of each person and the means to attain them. In this context, the *saadhya* for a *yogi* who desires to get rid of *samsaara* is the *mukta **aatma svaroopa*. He is in bound state and wants to attain liberated state. Bound state is associated with *prakruti* due to *karma*; now he wants to get rid of this, put an end to the birth and death cycle, and and attain the state of liberation. The *mukta aatma svaroopa* is separated from *prakruti **sambandha*. That *mukta aatma svaroopa* is called *Brahman* here; this is also a form of *Brahman*. In order to attain this *aatma svaroopa*, the *saadhana* is *praanaayaama* and such things, and this is told in the *yoga **shaastra*; this knowledge comes from study of *yoga shaastra*. Knowledge of the *praanaayaama* and such *saadhana*, which is about the *mukta aatma **svaroopa*, who is *jnyaana maya*, is the first *bheda*, first part. Knowledge about *mukta aatma svaroopa* which is *saadhya*, which comes from this *saadhana*, after adopting the means, *praanaayama*, etc., is the second *bheda*, second part, which comes from the *shaastra *- this is *shaastra **janya jnyaana*. After this, merging the *saadhya* and *saadhana bhaava **sambandha*, the knowledge of *shuddha aatma svaroopa*, which is without the differentiation of *deva, manushya*, etc., arises; this has the abundance of *aatma svaroopa jnyaana*, which is known as *dhyaana*; this is the third *bheda*. Then comes *aatma saakshaatkaara*. The *bhedaas* are knowledge of *saadhana*, knowledge of *saadhya*, getting rid of differentiation between *deva manushya* and others through *dhyaana*, then *aatma **saakshaatkaara*. In the *aatma saakshaatkaara* stage, the *yogi* does not consider any of the *saadhya saadhana* aspects as they are all opposed to *aatma avalokana*; he will be only in the experience of *aatma avalokana*, and fully immersed in *aatma avalokana*; all thoughts of all other aspects are rejected and only *aatma avalokana* ensues. This *aatma **svaroopa* is *nirvyaapaara*. The object of experience in this stage is *aatman*, and in this stage, thoughts of *saadhana, anushthaana* are all absent, as the *yogi* has already reached the stage of perception of self experience. This is the gist of the *shlokaas* which we are studying now. ***   


## 44
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 44:    
Sri Paraasharah - *** [[649]] ***Maitreya kaaranam proktam saadhanam sarva vastushu |   
Saadhyam cha vastu abhimatam yat saadhayitum aatmanah ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- In all objects of attainment, *saadhana* is the means, and *saadhya* is whatever one wants to acquire or achieve. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:*** ***Tasya chaaturvidyam darshayitum upakramate maitreya ityaadibhih |   
Maitreya iti | Yat kaaranam tat saadhanam yat saadhayitum   
abhimatam tat saadhyam | ***Whatever is the cause or means, is the *saadhana*. Whatever is desired to be achieved, is the *saadhya*. 





## 45
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 45:    
Yogino mukti kaamasya praanaayaama aadi saadhanam |   
Saadhyam cha paramam brahma punah na aavartate yatah ||*** For a *yogi* who is desirous of attaining liberation from *samsaara, **praanaayaama* and others are the *saadhana*, the means. That which is going to be attained is said to be *paramam brahma*, the *mukta aatma **svaroopa* separated from *prakruti sambandha*, from which he does not return back. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yogino iti | Paramam brahma mukta svaroopam \* Sarva brahma mayo   
harih iti vachanaat prakruti purushayoh api brahmatvam | Tat   
apekshayaa mukta svaroopasya parama brahmatvam |*** *Paramam brahma* is *mukta svaroopa* itself. It is told that *Hari* only is everything and *prakruti* and *purusha* are all said to be *Brahma* only, because they are all modes of *Brahma. Brahma* only is present in all those forms. When *prakruti purusha* is itself told as *Brahma*, the *mukta svaroopa* is superior to that, and is told as *Paramam Brahma*. These words - the meanings have to be understood according to context. ***   


## 46
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 46:    
Saadhanaa aalambanam jnyaanam muktaye yoginaam hi yat |   
Sa bhedah prathamah tasya brahma bhootasya vai mune ||***  [[650]] That which is attained through the means of *praanaayaama* and others, that knowledge which arises from *yoga shaastra*. This is the first *bheda*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Saadhana aalambanam iti | Saadhanaalambanam jnyaanam yoga   
shaastra janyam praanaayaama aadi saadhana vishayam jnyaanam; sa   
prathamo bhedah |   
   


## 47
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 47:    
Yunjatah klesha mukti artham saadhyam yat brahma yoginah |   
Tat aalambana vijnyaanam dviteeyo amsho mahaamune ||*** One who is engaged in the *yoga*, and is trying to attain that state, in order to get rid of all these difficulties, sufferings of *samsaara*, that which is going to be attained, the *mukta svaroopa*, which is attained through knowledge of *yoga shaastra, praanaayaama*, distinctive knowledge of *aatma svaroopa*, which is separated from *prakruti*, this is the second part. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yunjata iti | Tat aalambana vijnyaanam saankhya janyam prakruti   
vivikta aatma vishayam vishishta jnyaanam | ***





## 48
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 48:    
Ubhayoh to avibhaagena saadhya saadhanayoh hi yat |   
Vijnyaanam advaitamayam tat bhaago anyo mayaa uditah ||*** Knowing that *praanaayaama* is the means, and *aatma svaroopa* is to be attained, associating both and practicing that, and then reaching the state where there is no differentiation between *deva, manushya*, etc., the *aatma **aatma saamya* is experienced. *Yogi* goes into the state of *dhyaana*, where he experiences the *aatma aatma saamya*, that all *aatmaas* are *jnyaana **svaroopa* and there is no *manushya, deva bheda*; that this is all due to karma, and this is *prakruti*, and not related to *aatma svaroopa. Aatma **svaroopa* is similar everywhere. This is the third part. The differences which we see here, are because of *deva, manushya*, etc., which are forms of *prakruti*. All *jeevaatmans* inside are *jnyaana svaroopa*, there is *aatma **aatma saamya*, is the *advaita* told here. 



 [[651]] ***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Ubhayoh ityaadi | Avibhaagena samyogena, saadhya saadhana bhaava   
sambandhena | Advaita mayam deva manushyadi dvaita rahita aatma   
vishayatayaa tat prachuram, vijnyaanam dhyaanam | ***





## 49
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 49:    
Jnyaana trayasya cha etasya vishesho yo mahaamune |   
Tat niraakarana dvaara darshita aatma svaroopavat ||** *The *saadhana, saadhya*, and the *dhyaana *- rejecting them, meaning that not thinking about them, which is the route to attaining perception of the self, realizing the self, knowledge of the form of perceiving the nature of the self, is the fourth part. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Jnyaana trayasya iti | Uktasya jnyaana trayasya saadhana jnyaanatva   
aadi roopavato yo visheshah tasya niraakaranam - aparaamarshah   
yasya dvaaram darshita aatma svaroopavat tat aatma avalokana roopa   
jnyaanam chaturtho bhaaga iti aanushangah | ***



Before this, everything is told as *Bhagavaan's roopa, tanu*. So, it is always associated with *Paramaatman*. This *aatma svaroopa saakshaatkaara*, is not *kaivalya*, it is not without *Paramaatman*, it is experiencing it as *shareera* of *Paramaatman*, with *apruthak siddha sambandha*. That is why it is told that he does not return back. This is the real *aatma **svaroopa* experienced as being subservient to *Paramaatman*, ever associated with *Paramaatman*. This is understood here, as this is what is being told. 



Perceiving the self directly, putting an end to all these conceptions of *saadhana, saadhya*, etc., one attains *aatma saakshaatkaara*. 





## 50
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 50:    
Nirvyaapaaram anaakhyeyam vyaapti maatram anoopamam |   
Aatma sambodha vishayam sattaa maatram alakshanam ||*** This is the nature of *mukta aatma svaroopa*. See Commentary below. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** [[652]] ***Vinishpanna samaadheh itara paraamarshasya aatmaavalokana   
virodhitvaat tat niraakaranam dvaaram iti uktam | Darshita aatma   
svaroopavat iti uktasya aatma avalokanasya vishayam aatma   
svaroopam darshayati | Nirvyaapaaram iti | Nirvyaapaaram saadhana   
anusthaana rahitam | Anaakhyeyam roopa varnaadeenaam agochara   
svaroopam | Vyaapti maatram maatraa shabdo avadhaarane vyaaptam   
eva asankuchitam iti arthah | Anupamam eva anoopamam |   
Anoupamam iti cha paathah | Aatma sambodha vishayam sva jnyaana   
gamyam | Sattaa maatram apakshayaadi rahitam sattva eka gunakam   
| Alakshanam streetvaadi rahitam; linga janya jnyaana gamyam iti vaa   
|*** The last stage is *samaadhi*. When one has reached the state of *samaadhi*, if one is thinking about other things - *saadhana, saadhya*, etc., it is actually opposed to experience of the self. For one who has achieved *samaadhi*, thinking of other things is opposed to *aatma avalokana*. Not thinking about anything else, is said to be the path to attaining *aatma saakshaatkaara*. One who is perceiving the *aatma svaroopa*, the nature of that *aatma svaroopa*, the object of that perception, is going to be told here. *Nirvyaapaara* means that there is no *saadhana anushthaana. Anaakhyeya* means that form, class, differentiation is not there. *Vyaapti maatram* means that the *dharma **bhoota jnyaana* which is *sankuchita*, contracted due to *karma*, becomes fully evolved when the *karma bandha* is removed; it becomes all pervasive. *Anoopamam* means without comparison. *Aatma sambodha **vishayam* means that it knows about itself. *Sattaa maatram* means that it is just present, without the *shat bhaava vikaaraas* of *asti, jaayate, vardhate, **viparinamate, apaksheeyate, nashyati*; it is just said to be *sat. **Alakshanam* means it cannot be inferred through something else; we infer fire on seeing smoke, this is not like that; cannot be inferred through logic or inference. 





## 51
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 51:    
Prashaantam abhayam shuddham durvibhaavyam asamshrayam |   
Vishnoh jnyaanamayasya uktam tat jnyaanam brahma sanjnyitam ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Prashaantam iti | Prashaantam ashanaayaadi shat oormi rahitam | *** [[653]] ***Shuddham karma rahitam | Durvibhaavyam aroopaadimatvaat   
atarkyam iti vaa | Vishno roopam brahma samjnyitam tat jnyaanam   
evam uktam | ****Prashaantam* means that it is without the *oormi shatka, ashanayaa, pipaasa, **shoka, moha, jaraa, mrutyu *- hunger and thirst are said to be related to *praana, shoka* and *moha* are related to *manas*, old age and death are related to be the body. *Mukta aatma svaroopa* does not have *oormi shatka. **Abhayam* means without *karma bandha. Durvibhaavyam* means it cannot be established through logic, or cannot imagine a form for the *mukta aatma **svaroopa*. This is the form of *Vishnu* only, being *shareera* of *Vishnu*, which is also known by the name *Brahma *- this *jnyaana* is told like this. ***   


## 52
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 52:    
Tatra jnyaana nirodhena yogino yaanti te layam |   
Samsaara karshanoptou te yaanti nirbeejataam dvija ||*** *Jnyaana nirodhena* means *anya jnyaana nirodhena*. This is the kind of realization, meditation that they should have at the time of departing from the body; any knowledge other than this should not be there. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aatma yoginaam antima pratyayena avashyam bhaavyam, anyathaa   
punaraavruttih iti aaha tatra iti | Tatra nirvyaapaaram ityaadinaa   
ukte nija svaroopaje anya jnyaana nirodhena antima pratyaya balaat   
ye layam upaadhi viyogam yaanti, aavirbhoota svaroopaa bhavanti iti   
arthah | Krushyata iti karshanam kedaarah | Samsaara kedaare uptou   
sasya aavaape, vitusha vreehivat abeejataam yaanti | ***For *aatma yogis, antima pratyaya* is very essential - this was also studied in the *Bhagavad Geetha*, that *aatma yogis* have to have the knowledge at the time of leaving the body, otherwise they will come back. Not thinking of anything else, realizing the real nature of *aatman*, they get rid of this *karma **bandha*, they get separated from *upaadhi, karma*. They will attain their original real state. It is in the field of *samsaara* where the seeds are sown, *jeevaatmans* are going from birth to birth just like the seeds which are sown in the field of *samsaara*. For the *mukta aatmans*, this is not there. The paddy grain which is sown without the outer shell, will not grow into a plant, they will become like that, is the example given here; they will not  [[654]] come into *samsaara* again. 





## 53
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 53:    
Evam prakaaram amalam nityam vyaapakam akshayam |   
Samasta heya rahitam vishnvaakhyam paramam padam || ***After telling the forms created in *srushti, sthiti*, and then about the *mukta **svaroopa*, the *bhagavat svaroopa* is going to be told. He is all the time most pure - *nitya shuddhatva*. He is the inner self of everything, *sarva aatmatva*. He is always complete - *poornatva *- there is no change or modification in His real nature. There is nothing which is defiling in His characteristics -*heya raahitva *- He is away from everything that is defiling. These are all the characteristics which separate Him from *prakruti, baddha* and *mukta*. This is the *bhagavad svaroopa* called as *Vishnu*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha bhagavat svaroopam aaha evam ityaadinaa | Evam iti | Muktasya   
uktam nirvyaaparatvaat atidishyate \* Niranjanah paramam saamyam   
upaiti \* ityaadi shruteh | Asya nitya shuddhatva sarva aatmatva   
poornatva heya raahitva aadinaa prakruteh buddha muktebhyo   
visheshah |*** *Atidesha* means extending the meaning of one to another. All the things told for a *mukta svaroopa* are extended here. It is told that he attains similarity with *Paramaatman*. The characteristics of a *mukta* which were told are extended to *Paramaatman* also, because there is similarity between a *mukta* and *Paramaatman* in many aspects. Not being tainted with *karma*, he attains supreme similarity with *Paramaatman*. Additionally, there are several distinct and unique to *Paramaatman* alone, compared to *prakruti, **baddha, mukta*. 





## 54
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 54:    
Tat brahma paramam yogee yato naavartate punah |   
\(Apunya punyo paramah ksheena klesho ati nirmalah |\)   
Shrayatyapunya uparame ksheena klesho ati nirmale ||*** He is a *bhagavat yogi*. He does not have *punya*, does not have *karma **bandha. Mukta aatma svaroopa* attains a state where he does not have any attachment to *karma*. He gets rid of *karma bandha* completely.  [[655]] 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Tat brahma iti | Yogee bhagavat yogee | Asya api antima prayaya   
balena bhagavati leenasya apunaraavrutih drashtavyaa | ***Here, *yogi* means *bhagavat yogi*, one who is contemplating on *Bhagavaan*. Through realization of individual self only, one can attain *bhagavat **svaroopa*. He realizes the individual self as being subservient to *Paramaatman* only. He realizes *bhagavat svaroopa* during *antima **pratyaya*, and does not come back to *samsaara*. 





## 55
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 55:    
Dve roope brahmanah tasya moortam cha amoortam eva cha |   
Kshara akshara svaroope te sarva bhooteshu avasthite || ***Two forms of *Parabrahman* are going to be told now. All the *srujya **vastus* which are coming under creation, are all *Bhagavaan's shareera* only, was told; and the *mukta aatma svaroopa* is also *Bhagavaan's* form only, was told. These are told as *moorta* and *amoorta*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Brahmanah poorva uktam roopa dvayam prapanchayati dve roope iti |   
Moortam sa shareeram brahma aadi jeeva jaatam | Amoortam   
ashareeram mukta roopam | Ata eva aksharam sarva bhooteshu   
avasthitam \* Daaruni agnih \* Sa cha aanantyaaya kalpate \* ityaadeh | ****Moorta svaroopa* is that which is with a body, starting from *Chaturmukha **Brahma* to all the beings who are there in this *prakruti mandala *- having the bodies of *deva, manushya, yaksha, kinnara, pashu, pakshi, sareesrupa*, etc. *Amoorta* is that which is without a *karma vashya shareera*, which is *mukta svaroopa*. These are said to be *kshara* and *akshara svaroopaas*. It is present like fire which is present in firewood. It is there in all beings like that; we cannot see that; for a *mukta svaroopa*, the *dharma bhoota **jnyaana* is all pervading. 





## 56
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 56:    
Aksharam tat param brahma ksharam sarvam idam jagat |   
Eka desha sthitasya agneh jyotsnaa vistaarinee yathaa |   
Parasya brahma shaktih tathaa idam akhilam jagat ||***  [[656]] *Kshara* and *akshara* are told as *baddha jeevaas* and *mukta*. This is very similar to what is told in *Bhagavad Geetha. Akshara* is the *mukta aatma **svaroopa*. All the *jeevaas* in this *prakruti mandala* are said to be *kshara*. This *shloka* is an important *pramaana* for our *siddhaanta*. These two forms of *Paramaatman* are said to be the *shakti* of *Paramaatman*. How is this *Paramaatman's* form, how is this related to *Paramaatma svaroopa*? We say that it is inseparable association between *chetana **achetana* and *Paramaatman*. Fire which is present in one place only, whereas its brightness is spread all over. In the same way, this entire thing is *Bhagavaan's shakti*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aksharam iti | Idam shakti roopa dvayam parabrahmanah shaktih iti   
cha uchyate iti aaha ekadesha iti | Atra eka desha sthitasya vistaarinee   
iti \(visheshanaabhyaam\) pada dvayena prabhaa prabhaavatoh   
vailakshanyam darshitam | Anena parasmaat brahmano prabhaa   
roopasya jagato vailakshanyam \(siddham\) soochitam |   
Bhaashyakaarena \* Prakaashaadivat tu na evam parah \* iti asmin   
sootre prabhaa prabhaavatoh arthaantantaratvam samarthitam | Atra   
jagat shabdaadena achit vishishtasya jeevasya muktasya cha grahanam   
| ***There are two things - one which is present in one place, and one which is spread all over, and very much associated with fire itself. *Prabhaavat* is the *agni*, and *prabhaa* is the brightness. There is a difference between *prabhaa* and *prabhaavat*. From this, the relationship between the *chetana achetana *- this whole world which is said to be *shakti* of *Paramaatman*, and *Paramaatman*, is told as brightness and fire. *Bhagavaan* is in the place of *prabhaavat*, and the whole world is in the place of brightness, *prabhaa, jyotsnaa*. Difference between the *Paramaatman* and the world is told clearly here. This *pramaana* is used by *Bhaashyakaarar* in *Sri Bhaashya*, which is quoted by *Sri Engal **Aalwaan* here. What is established by *Bhaashyakaarar* in *Sri Bhaashya* is that the source of light and its brightness, are different and distinct, though they are inseparably associated. *Jagat* includes the *jeevaatman* who is having the *shareera* here, and also the *mukta aatma. Jeeva* who is qualified by the body - the embodied soul, and the liberated soul - both are included in the  [[657]] word *jagat* here. In the second *adhyaaya* of *Brahma Sutraas* while commenting on Sri *Bhaashya*, in the Third *Paada*, the *Sutra* 45 is *Prakaashaadivattu naivam parah*. This *adhikarana* is known as the *Amshaadhikarana*, where it is established that all *chetana achetana* are in *visheshya-visheshana amsha, Paramaatman* is *visheshya*, and is different and distinct. So, the *svaroopa* and *svabhaava* of *chetana achetana* are very different and distinct from *Paramaatman. Prakaasha* becomes the *amsha* of *Aaditya* and *Agni*. A qualified object, quality of the attribute is called *amsha*. This *shloka* is quoted in *Sutra* 3.46 of *Sri Bhaashya*, just like the brightness and object, *shakti* and that which has the *shakti*, is nothing but the *shareera aatma bhaava, amsha amshi bhaava. **Jagat* is *Paramaatman's amsha*, and He is *amshi. Jagat* is *Paramaatman's **shareera* and He is *aatma*. This is also quoted by *Sri Engal Aalwaan* here to show that this is a very important *pramaana* for our *siddhaanta*. 





## 57
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 57:    
Tatra api aasan na dooratvaat bahutva svalpataamayah |   
Jyotsnaabhedo asti tat shakteh tatvat maitreya vidyate || ***Further, it is justified that the *dharma bhoota jnyaana* of *jeevaatman* which gets contracted and expanded, is also like the *prakaasha* of *Agni*. It will be told that there is difference in *dharma bhoota jnyaana* of various beings. That which is closer to the fire and that which is a little far away from the fire; the brightness reduces as the distance increases from the source of the light, and it is more near the source of the light. There is a difference in the brightness, and there is a differentiation in *Paramaatman's **shakti* also. *Paramaatman's shakti* is nothing but *jagat*, His *shareera. **Jagat* includes the embodied souls and liberated souls. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shakti bhootasya brahma aadi sthaavara antasya jagato jnyaanaadishu   
taaratamyam asti iti aaha tatra iti | Tatra drushtaante agnou tat   
shakteh brahmanah shakteh jagatah jnyaanaadeh bahutva svalpataam   
ayoh bhedo vidyate iti arthah | ***In *dharma bhoota jnyaana* and others, there is a difference among the various bound selves here, and between bound selves and liberated selves. Some have more and some have less.  [[658]] 





## 58
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 58:    
Brahma vishnu shivaa brahman pradhaanaa brahma shaktayah |   
Tatah cha devaa maitreya nyoonaa daksha aadayah tathaa || ***Now, the *shakti* of *Paramaatman* which is told as *jagat*, is told in more detail here. All the sub varieties of that *shakti* will be told here, starting with *Brahma, Vishnu* and *Shiva*. Among the *shaktis* told, *Brahma, Vishnu, **Shiva* are the prominent of primary *shaktis*. Compared to these *Chaturmukha Brahma* and *Shiva, devaas* such as *Daksha* and others, are inferior in terms of *jnyaana* and *shakti*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Brahma iti | Brahma shivayoh shareeratvena shaktitvam | Vishnoh sva   
amsha avataaravat svaroopena eva | Tatah tebhyo devaah jnyaana   
shakti aadinaa nyoonaah | Eshaam etat jnyaanadeh taaratamyam   
karma roopa aavaarana alpatva bahutva krutam, na tu svaroopa   
krutam | ***Among the Trinity, *Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva - Chaturmukha **Brahma* and *Shiva* are the *srujyaas, baddha jeevaas*, and are born due to their *karma*; and are the *shakti* of *Paramaatman* being His *shareera*. Whereas *Bhagavaan* incarnates Himself as *Vishnu*, among the Trinity. So, *Vishnu* is His own *avataara*. What is going to be told for various kinds of beings, how there is a difference in their *jnyaana* and *shakti*, is told. Initially it was told that in the stage of *aatma svaroopa aavirbhaava* in the *dhyaana* state, all these differences disappear, and *aatma aatma **saamya* was told. The *taaratamya* which is told here - that one is more and one is less, is due to the karma and the *dharma bhoota jnyaana* and not in the *svaroopa*. *Svaroopa* is same for all the *aatmans*; all are *jnyaana aananda **svaroopa*. Differences that are told in *jnyaana* are because they are covered by *karma*; that is why one has more *jnyaana* and another has less *jnyaana. **Chaturmukha Brahma* has more *jnyaana*, his *dharma bhoota jnyaana* is more expanded, compared to *Daksha* and others. 



This is a very important *pramaana* in *Vishnu Puraana* which our *Aachaaryaas* quote, to show that the *dharma bhoota jnyaana* undergoes contraction and expansion.  [[659]] 



***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying the last chapter of *Amsha* 1, Chapter 22, where everything that is created is *Bhagavaan's **vibhooti* only, the *moorta* and *amoorta roopa* of *Bhagavaan*, which was told by *Sri Paraasharar*. ***   


## 55
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 55:    
Dve roope brahmanah tasya moortam cha amoortam eva cha |   
Kshara akshara svaroope te sarva bhooteshu avasthite ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Brahmanah poorva uktam roopa dvayam prapanchayati dve roope iti |   
Moortam sa shareeram brahma aadi jeeva jaatam | Amoortam   
ashareeram mukta roopam | Ata eva aksharam sarva bhooteshu   
avasthitam \* Daaruni agnih \* Sa cha aanantyaaya kalpate \* ityaadeh | ***





## 56
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 56:    
Aksharam tat param brahma ksharam sarvam idam jagat |   
Eka desha sthitasya agneh jyotsnaa vistaarinee yathaa |   
Parasya brahma shaktih tathaa idam akhilam jagat || ***



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aksharam iti | Idam shakti roopa dvayam parabrahmanah shaktih iti   
cha uchyate iti aaha ekadesha iti | Atra eka desha sthitasya vistaarinee   
iti \(visheshanaabhyaam\) pada dvayena prabhaa prabhaavatoh   
vailakshanyam darshitam | Anena parasmaat brahmano prabhaa   
roopasya jagato vailakshanyam \(siddham\) soochitam |   
Bhaashyakaarena \* Prakaashaadivat tu na evam parah \* iti asmin   
sootre prabhaa prabhaavatoh arthaantantaratvam samarthitam | Atra   
jagat shabdaadena achit vishishtasya jeevasya muktasya cha grahanam   
|   
 ****Baddha jeevaas* are all told as *kshara*, and the *mukta aatmaas* are told as *akshara*. How the whole world is inseparably associated with *Paramaatman*, and at the same time, it is also a *padaartha* by itself, *chetana achetana aatmaka prapancha* is *Bhagavaan's roopa, vibhooti,* [[660]] *shareera*, is being told. As the brightness spreads all over, from the fire which is located in one place; the brightness is very much a part of the fire, but it is different compared to the fire itself; it is like the attribute of the fire. In the same way, the entire world is *shakti* of *Paramaatman*; the *baddhaas* and *muktaas* are both included in the *jagat*. In this world, we have all beings who are embodied souls and there are liberated selves in *Paramapada*. These embodied souls and liberated selves are like *shakti* of *Paramaatman*; like the brightness of fire; they are inseparably associated with *Paramaatman*; this is being told here. 





## 57
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 57:    
Tatra api aasan na dooratvaat bahutva svalpataamayah |   
Jyotsnaabhedo asti tat shakteh tatvat maitreya vidyate || ***Just as the brightness near the source of the light is much more than at a distance, in the same way, there is a difference in the *shaktis* also. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shakti bhootasya brahma aadi sthaavara antasya jagato jnyaanaadishu   
taaratamyam asti iti aaha tatra iti | Tatra drushtaante agnou tat   
shakteh brahmanah shakteh jagatah jnyaanaadeh bahutva   
svalpataamayoh bhedo vidyate iti arthah | ***What is the *taaratamya *\(difference\) which is told - that it is more in some places, and less in some other places. This is just like the brightness of fire which is more near the fire, and less at a distance. Like this, in the *shaktis* of *Bhagavaan* also, there is a difference in their *dharma bhoota **jnyaana*, attributive consciousness. There is a difference among all beings starting from *Chaturmukha Brahma*, and up to the *sthaavaraas*, the lowest of the beings. In some it is more, and in some it is less. 





## 58
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 58:    
Brahma vishnu shivaa brahman pradhaanaa brahma shaktayah |   
Tatah cha devaa maitreya nyoonaa daksha aadayah tathaa ||*** The main or prominent *shaktis* of *Bhagavaan* are said to be the trinity, *Brahma, Vishnu* and *Shiva*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** [[661]] ***Brahma iti | Brahma shivayoh shareeratvena shaktitvam | Vishnoh sva   
amsha avataaravat svaroopena eva | Tatah tebhyo devaah jnyaana   
shakti aadinaa nyoonaah | Eshaam etat jnyaanadeh taaratamyam   
karma roopa aavaarana alpatva bahutva krutam, na tu svaroopa   
krutam |*** *Chaturmukha Brahma* and *Shiva* are being the *shareera* of *Paramaatman; **shakti* is also a *paryaaya pada* for *shareera*, meaning controlled, meant for His purpose, and supported by *Paramaatman*, and having this relationship. Among the trinity, *Vishnu* is a direct *avataara* of *Paramaatman* Himself. *Devaas*, other gods are lower, inferior compared to them \( *Brahma, Vishnu* and *Shiva*\), means that with respect to knowledge and capability or powers. Compared to *Devaas, Daksha **Prajaapati* and others are having still lesser knowledge and powers. This is an important explanation in the commentary - that the *taaratamya *\(difference\) which is told, why is there this difference - because the nature of all these embodied souls is that they are all *jeevaatman*, except *Vishnu* who is an *avataara* of *Paramaatman* Himself. All embodied souls in their essential nature are all the same, *jnyaana **svaroopa*, though they are different beings. The *taaratamya* is in the *dharma bhoota jnyaana*, and why is this difference coming - this difference is because of the *karmaas*, the respective *karmaas* of those individual selves. One individual self becomes *Chaturmukha Brahma*, another one becomes *Shiva*, another *Indra, Varuna, Daksha Prajaapati*, etc., they are all created like this, and the difference in their attributive knowledge is because of karma done in their previous births. The *dharma **bhoota jnyaana* in the original state is fully evolved for everyone, whereas here, it is hidden or covered by the karma. When the *karma bandhana* goes, they get liberated, and the *dharma bhoota jnyaana* shines forth in its original state; it is not created at that time, but it just exists in its natural state. It is not due to *svaroopa* but due to *karma* that there is difference in *dharma bhoota jnyaana* of these individual selves. 





## 59
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 59:    
Tato manushyaah pashavo mruga pakshi sareesrupaah |   
Nyoonaa nyoonataraah cha eva vruksha gulmaadayah tathaa ||*** Compared to *Daksha Prajaapati* and others, the humans, *manushyaas* are  [[662]] having still less *dharma bhoota jnyaana*, and *shakti*. The animals, deer and others, cow and others, birds and snakes are having still less. Comparatively, each has lesser and lesser knowledge and powers. Compared to them, still less is there in trees, herbs, etc. 



In *Vedaartha Sangraha, Sri Bhaashyakaarar* says that anything which has name and form can have a *jeevaatman* in it. But its *dharma bhoota **jnyaana* will be so less that it does not exhibit that kind of knowledge. 





## 60
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 60:    
Tat etat aksharam nityam jaganmunivara akhilam |   
Aavirbhaava tirobhaava janma naasha vikalpavat || ***



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Uktam jagat roopam nigamayati tat etat iti | Tat etat akshayam iti cha   
paathah | Akshayam \* Anantasya na cha tasya antah samkhyaanam cha   
api vidyate \* iti jeevaanaam asamkhyeyatvam vakshyate | Atah   
pratisargam anyoonam | Nityam satkaaryatvaat | \* Avyucchinnaah   
tatah tu ete sarga sthiti anta samyamaah \* iti vachanaat pravaaha   
roopena cha nityam; aavirbhaava tirobhavou sankocha vikaasou, tou   
eva janma naashou | ***Whatever is the form of this whole world - where *Bhagavaan* exists in various forms, which are all His *vibhooti, shakti, shareera*, is being concluded here. Means that it is endless, His form is never-ending, there are innumerable beings in this world. The number of individual souls cannot be counted, they are innumerable. They are called *nitya* because they are all created, but existing in the *kaarana*. The *kaarya* or effect exists in the *kaarana* which is the cause, this is called *satkaaryavaada*. In this case, all the *chetana achetanaatmaka prapancha* is existing in the *sookshma **roopa*, subtle form in *Bhagavaan* during *pralaya*; at that time, there is no name and form differentiation; when creation happens, they all come into the gross state; so the *kaarya* actually exists in the *kaarana*; because there is unbroken chain of creation, sustenance and dissolution - these are going on happening without any break. Another way to tell *nityatva* is *pravaaha **nityatva*, because there is on Indra or Agni or *Varuna* or *Chaturmukha **Brahma* all the time. If the time of one *Chaturmukha Brahma* gets over,  [[663]] another being comes into that position; this is called *pravaaha nityatva. **Aavirbhaava* and *tirobhaava* means *sankocha* and *vikaasa*, increase or reduction in *dharma bhoota jnyaana*, and this itself is told as *janma* and *naasha*, birth and death. 





## 61
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 61:    
Sarva shakti mayo vishnuh svaroopam brahmano aparam |   
Moortam yat yogibhih poorvam yoga aarambheshu chintyate || ****Vishnu* is said to be *sarva shakti maya*, all these are said to be His *shakti*. All the embodied beings and the *muktaas *- are all His *shakti*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Atha vilakshanam roopaantaram vaktum moorta amoorta bhedena   
uktam shakti shabda vaachyam roopa dvayam upasamharati sarva   
shakti mayo vishnuh iti | Tat eva roopaantaram aaha svaroopam iti   
aarabhya jaayate mune iti antena | Svaroopam - roopam,   
yogaarambheshu - samaadhi upakramabhootaasu chaturvidhaasu   
dhaaranaasu dhyaane cha | ***In order to tell another form of *Bhagavaan*, which is very different and distinct from these two forms which were told -*moorta* and *amoorta*, *kshara* and *akshara, baddha* and *mukta*, the two forms which are said to be *shaktis* of *Paramaatman*, is being concluded here. This is His another form. What were told earlier, in the four stages of *dhaarana*, and *dhyaana*, that which is meditated upon before attaining the *samaadhi*. 





## 62
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 62:    
Saalambano mahaayogah sabeejo yatra samsthitah |   
Manasi avyaahate samyak yunjataam jaayate mune ||*** When they want to attain that *samaadhi*, they meditate upon this form, and realize this form of *Bhagavaan*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Saalambana iti | Saalambano moorti vishayatvaat | Mahaa yogah astra   
bhooshana anga vishishta divya roopa vishayam chaturvidha dhaaranaa   
janyam dhyaanam | Sabeejah - samantra anusandhaanah | Sa cha *** [[664]] ***nirbeeja yogaakhya samaadheh anantarah | Yatra - roope | ***This is having a form to meditate upon. *Mahaa yogah* is explained as meditation on the form of *Bhagavaan* which is qualified by *astra, **bhooshana, anga*, that divine form of *Bhagavaan* having all the weapons and ornaments, as parts of the *divya mangala vigraha*, and is also meditated upon during the *dhyaana*, through the four stages of *dhaarana. **Sabeeja* means that it is meditated upon with a *mantra*. There is one more called *nirbeeja yoga*, which is different from this. 





## 63
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 63:    
Sa parah sarva shakteenaam brahmanah samanantaram |   
Moortam brahma mahaabhaaga sarva brahma mayo harih || ***



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Sa parah iti | Sah - vishnuh sarvaasaam roopatvena uktaanaam   
shakteenaam parah utkrushtah | Yat etat svaroopam brahmano aparam   
iti uktam brahma shabda vaachyam roopam tat brahmanah vishnoh   
samanantaram antarangam iti aaha brahmanah samantaram iti |   
Etaani treeni api roopaani brahma shabda vaachyaani; tanmayo harih   
iti aaha - sarva brahma mayo harih iti |*** This form of *Vishnu* is superior to all the forms that were told. *Samanantaram* means that His own form is superior to all other forms. All these are told as *Brahma* only, the three forms - *moorta, amoorta* and His own internal form having *astra bhooshana* which is meditated upon by the *yogis* through a *mantra*. 





## 64
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 64:    
Yatra sarvam idam protam otam cha eva akhilam jagat |   
Tato jaatam jagati asmin sa jagat cha akhilam mune || ***All these are embedded in *Bhagavaan*, just like warp and weft of a cloth. It is all created from Him only, He Himself is the whole world. 



It was told earlier that ' *Jagat cha sah*'. Everything is His *shareera*, His *shakti*, and are all inseparably associated with *Paramaatman*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** [[665]] ***Yatra iti | Yatra - harou | Tatra sarvam iti cha paathah | Shishtam   
spashtam | ***





## 65
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 65:    
Kshara akshara mayo vishnuh bibharti akhilam eeshvarah |   
Purusha avyaakruta mayam bhooshana astra svaroopavat || ***He supports everything, the form of *kshara* and *akshara*. Having the *svaroopa* where *bhooshana, astra*, the *adhishtaatru devataas* of all these *tattvaas*, are all present in His form. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kshara akshara maya iti | Kshara akshara roope poorvam ukte |   
Bhooshana astra svaroopavat iti bhooshana astra roopena yuktam |   
Sookshma roopena tadattadhidevataabhoota bhooshana astra   
svaroopastham purusha avyaakruta aadimayam akhilam bibharti iti   
arthah | ***The form which is having all the *bhooshanaas* and *astraas*. All these *tattvaas* are present as *astraas* and *bhooshanaas*, and they are the *adhidevataas* of these *tattvaas*; in the form of all *chetanaas*, He is supporting all of these. ***   


## 66
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 66:    
Maitreyah -   
Bhooshana astra svaroopastham yat etat akhilam jagat |   
Bibharti bhagavaan vishnuh tat mama aakhyaatum arhasi ||*** *Maitreya *- The whole world, you said, is present in the form of *bhooshanaas* and *astraas* in *Bhagavaan's* divine form. He supports the whole world in the form of *bhooshanaas* and *astraas*. Please do tell me about that divine form of *Bhagavaan* which is supporting all the *tattvaas*, this whole world as ornaments and weapons. 



Now, *Paraasharar* starts to tell the *astra bhooshana* form of *Paramaatman*. This is how we do worship *Bhagavaan* also everyday. *Sri Bhaashyakaarar* has written one work called *Nitya Grantha*, which says how the *Bhagavad **Aaraadhana* has to be done. In the very beginning, *Bhaashyakaarar* says ' *Atha parama ekaantino bhagavad aaraadhana prayogam vakshye*' - that we  [[666]] have to do *aaraadhana* of all the *bhooshanaas, astraas*, individually, one by one, as *chetanaas*. We can also see this in *Kriyaa Deepa* by *Sri Paraashara **Bhattar*. 





## 67
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 67:    
Sri Paraasharah -   
Namaskrutva aprameyaaya vishnave prabha vishnave |   
Kathayaami yathaa aakhyaatam vasisthena mama abhavat ||*** *Sri Paraasharar *- Whatever *Vasishta* has taught me earlier, this *astra **bhooshana roopa* of *Paramaatman*, I am going to tell you by offering *namaskaarams* to *Mahaa Vishnu*, one who is immeasurable, who has no parallel. 





## 68
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 68:    
Aatmaanam asya jagato nirlepam aguna amalam |   
Bibharti koustubha mani svaroopam bhagavaan harih || ***Each *tattva* is present in *Bhagavaan's* form as an ornament, or a weapon; the *tattva*, means the *adhishthaatru devataa*. All the *jeevaatmans* are present in *Bhagavaan's* divine form, as a *Koustubha* gem. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Prathamam aatmano abhimaani adhidaivatam aaha aatmaanam iti | \*   
Yathaa na kriyate jyotsnaa mala prakshaalana aatmaneh \* ityaadi   
shlokena aatmano mani saamyam uktam | Sootra kaarena api \*   
Gunaadvaa aalokavat iti uktam; tena tat roopena tat dhaaranam   
yuktam | Aatmaanam iti ekavachanam jaati abhipraayam samashti   
abhipraayam vaa | ***The *abhimaani devataas* of *aatmans* are told. It is told in the last Chapter of *Brahma Sutraas*, the Fourth *Adhyaaya*, where, when the *karma **bandha* goes, the *jeevaatman's dharma bhoota jnyaana* expands, becomes all pervasive and shines forth in its original state; there is a doubt put there whether it is newly created; an example is given, just like a gem is there covered by dust, when the dust is removed, the gem shines forth by itself; this shining is not newly created; it is already present in the gem; this is the very nature of the gem itself; it is not seen because it is covered by dust; when the dust is removed, it shines forth in its natural state; in the same  [[667]] way, when the *jeevaatman* whose *dharma bhoota jnyaana* is covered or hidden by the *karmaas*, when the *karma bandha* is removed, his *dharma **bhoota jnyaana* becomes all pervasive; it shines forth in its natural state and is not newly created. For this, this *shloka* is told - just as the brightness is not created for a gem when it is cleaned up, so jeevaatman is mani saamya, similarity is shown with a gem which has that kind of shine. There is a Brahma Sutra, *Gunaat vaa aalokavat*; there is an *Upanishadic mantra* which says - *Sa cha aanantyaaya kalpate*; he becomes *ananta* not in his *svaroopa* but in his *dharma*. The *aanantya* is in his *dharma bhoota **jnyaana*, the all pervasiveness that he achieves is in his attributive consciousness; like the brightness of a light which is hidden, when the block is removed, the light shines forth everywhere. Because of this, the *koustubha mani saamya* is told for the *jeevaatmans*. The word *aatmaanam* is told, in singular; it is not one *aatma*, but it is the entire collectivity of the *aatmans*; or it can be the class of *aatmans* told. ***   


## 69
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 69:    
Shreevatsa samsthaana dharam anantena samaashritam |   
Pradhaanam buddhih adhyaaste gadaaroopena maadhave ||*** That *Ananta* is supporting the *pradhaana, prakruti*, as *Shreevatsa chinhaa. **Buddhi* is present in the form of the *gadaa*, 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Shreevatsa iti | Shreevatso romaa aavarta visheshah; \*   
Shreevatsenorasi shreemaan romaavartena raajate \* iti harivamsha   
ukteh | Sa cha lakshmeenivaasa sthaanam amruta mayatvaat sarva   
praroha hetuh | Pradhaanam pradhaana abhimaani | Gadaabuddhyoh   
sthitatvena saamyam | ****Shreevatsa* is a mark like a tuft of hair, in His chest. *Harivamsha* says this. This is where *Mahaa Lakshmi* resides. Because *Mahaa Lakshmi* resides there, it is *amruta maya*, and is the cause of prosperity of everything. *Pradhaana* means *moola prakruti, avyakta*, the *abhimaani **devataa* of this. *Gadaa* is the mace, which is hard, firm; *buddhi* is also firm. 





## 70
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 70:    
Bhootaadim indriyaadim cha dvidhaa ahamkaaram eeshvarah | *** [[668]] ***Bibharti shanka roopena shaarnga roopena cha sthitam || ***There are three *ahamkaaraas - saatvika, raajasa* and *taamasa*. In creation, *prakruti* is made of 24 *tattvaas, prakruti, mahat \(buddhi\), **ahamkaara \(sattva, rajas, tamas*\), etc. These are all material, *dravyaas*. From *saatvika ahamkaara, indriyaas* are all created, with the help of *raajasa ahamkaara* also. From the *taamasa ahamkaara*, the *pancha **tanmaatraas* and *pancha bhootaas* are created; this is said to be *bhootaadi. **Bhootaadi* is *taamasa ahamkaara; indriyaadi* is *saatvika ahamkaara *- these two *tattvaas *- He supports them as *Shankha *\(conch\) and *Shaarnga *\(Divine Bow\), which are present in *Bhagavaan's* divine form. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bhootaadim iti | Shabda guna hetuh shankhah shabda aadi roopa   
bhoota kaarana ahamkaara abhimaanee | ***From *Shankha*, the sound is produced. *Taamasa ahamkaara* is present as *Shankha*, and *Saatvika ahamkaara* is present as *Shaarnga*. For *Shankha*, the similarity is because *shabda* is the quality of *pancha bhootaas*. 





## 71
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 71:    
Chala svaroopam atyantam javena antarita anilam |   
Chakra svaroopam cha mano dhatte vishnuh kare sthitam || ****Manas tattva* is supported in Divine form of *Bhagavaan* as the divine *Sudarshana Chakra*, because it is fickle minded, keeps changing, not stable; with this speed, it exceeds speed of *Vaayu*. So, the mind moves in such speed, does not stay firm; this is why concentrating on one object is so difficult, and has to be practiced through *yoga*; mind moves faster than *Vaayu*. In His divine hand, *Bhagavaan* is holding the *Sudarshana Chakra*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Chala svaroopam iti | Manaso api sheeghrataratvaat sudarshanasya tat   
niyantrutvam | ***The mind, because of the speed with which it moves, *Sudarshana* is said to represent the *manas. Sudarshana chakra* is the *abhimaani devataa* of *manas*. 





## 72
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 72:    
Pancha roopaa tu yaa maalaa vyjayantee gadaabhrutah | *** [[669]] ***Saa bhoota hetu sanghaato bhootamaalaa cha vai dvija || ***



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Pancha roopa iti | Pancha roopaa muktaa maanikya marakata   
indraneela vajrasavarnaa | Bhoota hetu sanghaatah tanmaatra   
samudaayah | Bhoota maalaa cha mahaa bhootaavalih cha, sookshma   
sthoola bhoota mayee iti arthah | Bhoota hetu samvaata bhoota   
maalaa iti paathe tanmaatra sanghaatah tat udbhoota bhootamaala   
cha iti arthah | Krishna shukla lohita peeta shyaamaah pruthivyaadaya   
iti, bhootamaalaayaah cha paancha roopyam | ***These are the five forms of gems - *Muktaa, Manikya, Marakata, Indraneela, **Vajrasavarna. Bhoota hetu sanghaata* is the collection of *tanmaatraas - **bhoota hetu* means the cause of the *pancha bhootaas*. The cause of the *pancha bhootaas* are the *tanmaatraas*. From *ahamkaara, **tanmaatraas* are created, and from *tanmaatraas, pancha bhootaas* are created. *Bhoota maalaas* are the *pancha mahaa bhootaas, pruthivi, ap, **tejas, vaayu, aakaaasha *- in the *sookshma* and *sthoola* form; after *pancheekarana*, they become the *sthoola bhootaas*. The *Vyjayanti **maala*, which is present in *Bhagavaan's* divine auspicious form, represents this - *pancha tanmaatraas* and *pancha bhoota sookshma* and *sthoola. Bhoota **maalaa* also has five forms - *krishna, shukla, lohita, peeta, shyaama*, the various colours. All the *abhimaani devataas* of these *tattvaas* are present in the *Vyjayanti Maala* of *Bhagavaan's* form. 





## 73
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 73:    
Yaani indriyaani asheshaani buddhi karma aatmakaani vai |   
Shara roopaani asheshaani taani dhatte janaardanah || ***All the *indriyaas* which are *jnyaanendriyaas* and *karmendriyaas*, are present in the form of arrows, in *Janaardana's* form. This means the *abhimaani **devataas* of the *jnyaanendriyaas* and *karmendriyaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yaani iti | Indriyaanaam vishayeshu preryamaanatvaat shara saamyam   
| ***Why are they present in the form of arrows, because they are impelling one towards the sense objects.  [[670]] 





## 74
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 74:    
Bibharti yat cha asivaram achyuto atyanta nirmalam |   
Vidyaamayam tu tat jnyaanam avidyaa kosha samsthitam || ****Vidyaa* and *avidyaa* are also present in the form of sword, and cover, sheath, scabbard, *charma*. Sheath is *avidyaa*, because it covers the *Vidyaa. **Vidyaa* is present as sword. *Vidyaa* is very pure. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bibharti iti | Asivat brahmavidyaayaah samsaara cchedakatvam;   
tadasiratnam vidyaamayam vidyaamaya jnyaanaadi daivatam iti   
arthah | \(Asirvidyaaroopam iti arthah |\) Avidyaa - ajnyaanam, tasya   
aatma tirodhaanakatvaat charmasaamyam | ****Vidyaa* is said to be *Brahma Vidyaa*, which cuts off *samsaara*; this is why it is given a similarity of a sword. Sheath is *charma*, because it covers the real nature of *aatman, avidyaa* is present in the form of sheath. 





## 75
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 75:    
Ittham pumaan pradhaanam cha buddhi ahamkaaram eva cha |   
Bhootaani cha hrusheekeshe manah sarvendriyaani cha |   
Vidyaa avidye cha maitreya sarvam etat samaashritam || ***Thus the divine auspicious form of *Bhagavaan*, which is different from the *moorta* and *amoorta* which was told, supports all the *abhimaani **devataas* of all the *tattvaas*; this is told for purposes of meditation. *Pumaan* means all the *chetanaas. Pradhaanam* means *moola **prakruti, avyakta. Buddhi* is *mahat. Ahamkaara* is *ahamkaara tattva. **Bhootaani* means *pancha bhootaas* and *pancha tanmaatraas. Manas* and all the *jnyaanendriyaas* and *karmendriyaas. Vidyaa* and *avidyaa*. All these are supported and existing in the divine auspicious form of *Bhagavaan*, as *astraas* and *bhooshanaas*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Uktam artham nigamayati ittham iti | Ukta arthe abhiyukta vachanam \*   
Bhaasvaram divya vapusham aaspadam cha akhila aatmaanam |   
Koustubham purato vishnoh bhaaskaraabham anusmaret | Pradhaana   
tattvasya aadhaaram sva mantrena ati sundaram | Sreevatsam purato *** [[671]] ***vishnoh hema prabham anusmaret | Devasya dakshine paarshve   
hetiraajam sudarshanam | Chala svaroopam ati ugram manah tattva   
aadi daivatam | Yaam vadanti puraanajnyaa bhootamaalaam   
maneeshinah | Aadhaara bhootaam bhootaanaam \* ityaadi | ****Aachaaryaas* have told like this. This is the divine auspicious form of *Bhagavaan* holding all the *tattvaas* as *astraas* and *bhooshanaas*, to be meditated upon. All the *jeevaatmans* are supported there as *Koustubha **mani*, in the front; one has to meditate upon the *jeeva tattvaas* which are present there in *Bhagavaan's* form. Then, *Shreevatsa* has to be meditated upon. On the right, there is *Sudarshana*, the king of all weapons, and the *adhidaivata* of *manas*. And the *Vyjayanti* present as *bhoota maalaa*. ***   


## 76
Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 76:    
Astra bhooshana samsthaan svaroopam roopa varjitah |   
Bibharti maayaa roopo asou shreyase praaninaam harih ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Astra bhooshana samsthaana svaroopam iti | Ukta prakaaraanaam   
astra bhooshanaanaam samsthaanam - aaspadam svaroopam vigraham   
roopa varjitah - karma nimitta praakruta roopa hitah maayaa roopah   
ananta aascharya roopah shreyase darshana anusmarana naama   
sankeertana aadinaa jagato abhyudayaaya dharma   
samsthaapanaartham cha | Yathaa vakshyati \* Samastaah shaktayah   
shroutaa iti aarabhya \* Na saa karma nimittajaa iti antena | \* Na te   
roopam na cha aakaara ityaadi cha |*** Whatever was told of *Bhagavaan*, having all the *astraas* and *bhooshanaas*, which are representing *abhimaani devataas* of various *tattvaas*, is the *Divya **Mangala Vigraha*, divine auspicious form of *Bhagavaan*. This form is not because of *karma. Maayaa* is told as *aascharya*. Why does He support all these, and why do people meditate upon Him. For the *shreyas* of this whole world - one can see a divine auspicious form of *Bhagavaan* having *bhooshana* and *astra* and enjoy; for continuous meditation again and again; one can do *naama sankeertana*; for the prosperity and good of this whole world; and also in order to establish *dharma*. All the *shaktis* are present in the divine auspicious form of *Bhagavaan*; this form is due to His own *sankalpa*; He is the controller of  [[672]] everything. In *Jitanta stotra*, does not mean that He does not have form and *aakaara*, He can also be present without form as *antaryaami*; He has a divine auspicious form which is eternal, present all the time with Him; this form is not for Him, but for the devotees to meditate upon. 



Bound selves get form because of *karma*, in order to experience the *punya* and *paapa phalaas*. 



*Maayaa* is told as *aascharya shakti*; we have seen that *Shambaraasura* created so many *maayaas* which were all destroyed. 





## 77
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 77:    
Savikaaram pradhaanam cha pumaamsam cha akhilam jagat |   
Bibharti pundareekaakshah tat evam parameshvarah ||*** 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yathaa astra bhooshanaadi roopena avasthitam pradhaana aadi   
tattvam bibharti evam jagat cha bibharti iti aaha - savikaaram iti | ***All the *tattvaas* which were supported in *Bhagavaan* were told. Not only in the causal state, but in the state of effect also, whatever is present, that also He supports in His form, is told here. All the *prakruti*, and others, in the state of effect - He supports these also in the same way. Just as He supports the *tattvaas* in the *Astra Bhooshana* form, in the same way, He supports the world also. 





## 78
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 78:    
Yaa vidyaa yaa tathaa avidyaa yat sat yat cha asat avyayam |   
Tat sarvam sarva bhooteshe maitreya madhusoodane ||*** Everything - *Vidyaa, avidyaa, sat, asat *- is present in Him. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Prasangaat vibhooti vistaaram aaha yaa vidyaa iti | ***





## 79
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 79:    
Kalaa kaashthaa nimesha aadi dinartvayana haayanaih |   
Kaala svaroopo bhagavaan \(paro\) apaapo harih avyayah || *** [[673]] *Bhagavaan* supports *kaala svaroopa* also. Though *kaala* is *akhanda*, due to *upaadhi*, it is seen in various divisions, *kalaa, kaashtha, nimesha, **dina *\(day\), *rutu *\(season\), *ayana \(uttaraayana, dakshinaayana\), haayana **\(varsha, samvatsara*\). 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kalaa iti | Haayanaih iti ittham bhoota lakshano triteeyaa | ***



Now, he goes further to explain that all the worlds are supported by *Bhagavaan* only, all the *vidyaas, Vedaas*. This chapter concludes with what is the *phala* for studying, doing *adhyayana* of this *Amsha*. 



***Recap***: In the previous session, we were studying the wonderful way in which *Bhagavaan* supports all the *tattvaas*, in the form of *astraas* and *bhooshanaas* in His *Divya Mangala Vigraha*, His divine auspicious form, which is for doing ultimate good for the whole world, *Sri **Paraasharar* says. 





## 76
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 76:    
Astra bhooshana samsthaan svaroopam roopa varjitah |   
Bibharti maayaa roopo asou shreyase praaninaam harih ||*** Why does He support all the *tattvaas* as *astraas* and *bhooshanaas*, in His *Divya Mangala Vigraha*? He is not a *karma vashya*, He is *karma **adhyaksha*. His form is not *praakruta*, but it is *divya, apraakruta, mangala, **shubaashraya*. ***   
Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Astra bhooshana samsthaana svaroopam iti | Ukta prakaaraanaam   
astra bhooshanaanaam samsthaanam - aaspadam svaroopam vigraham   
roopa varjitah - karma nimitta praakruta roopa hitah maayaa roopah   
ananta aascharya roopah shreyase darshana anusmarana naama   
sankeertana aadinaa jagato abhyudayaaya dharma   
samsthaapanaartham cha | Yathaa vakshyati \*   
Samastaah shaktayah shroutaa iti aarabhya \* Na saa karma nimittajaa   
iti antena | \* Na te roopam na cha aakaara ityaadi cha |*** 



 [[674]] The *astra bhooshana adhyaaya* of *Bhagavaan*, which has all the *tattvaas* as *astraas* and *bhooshanaas*; this is for the ultimate good of the world. One who meditates upon this form, where all the *tattvaas* are present as *astraas* and *bhooshanaas*, this is said to be *mahaa yoga*. Not only the *tattvaas*, He also supports this whole world, which is in the state of effect; this is going to be told now. 





## 77
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 77:    
Savikaaram pradhaanam cha pumaamsam cha akhilam jagat |   
Bibharti pundareekaakshah tat evam parameshvarah || ***The Supreme Lord, *Parameshvara*, who is *Pundareekaaksha*, whom the *Upanishad* says is the person in the *Aaditya Mandala*, well known as the cause of the universe, and the seekers and meditators meditate upon Him, He also supports this whole world, which is in the state of effect, this *pradhaana, prakruti*, this *praakruta jagat* with all the *bhoutika **padaarthaas* and the embodied souls; He supports all of this. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Yathaa astra bhooshanaadi roopena avasthitam pradhaana aadi   
tattvam bibharti evam jagat cha bibharti iti aaha - savikaaram iti | ***He is said to be supporting \(in His *Divya Mangala Vigraha*\) all the *tattvaas, **tanmaatraas, pancha bhoota tattvaas, ahamkaara, mahat, moola prakruti*, and all the *chetanaas *- this was told. He also supports the world. 





## 78
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 78:    
Yaa vidyaa yaa tathaa avidyaa yat sat yat cha asat avyayam |   
Tat sarvam sarva bhooteshe maitreya madhusoodane || ***The expanse of His *vibhooti* is being told. He supports everything, everything is His *vibhooti*. He supports everything, *Vidyaa, avidyaa, sat, **asat. Asat* means that which is not there now, it was there earlier, or will come later; can also be told as that which is in *sookshma* form. All these things are supported by this Supreme Lord, *Madhusoodana*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Prasangaat vibhooti vistaaram aaha yaa vidyaa iti | ***





## 79
 [[675]] ***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 79:    
Kalaa kaashthaa nimesha aadi dinartvayana haayanaih |   
Kaala svaroopo bhagavaan \(paro\) apaapo harih avyayah || ***He is the controller of even *kaala. Kaala* is also *shareera* to Him. He supports it. *Kaala*, which has got the divisions, *kalaa, kaashtha, nimesha, **dina, rutu, ayana*. This is also a *svaroopa* of *Bhagavaan*, form of *Bhagavaan* only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Kalaa iti | Haayanaih iti ittham bhoota lakshano triteeyaa |*** 





## 80
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 80:    
Bhooh loko atha bhuvah lokah suvah loko munisattama |   
Mahah janah tapah satyam sapta lokaa \(lokaan imaan\) ime vibhuh || ***All the seven worlds - *bhooh, bhuvah, suvah, mahah, janah, tapah, satyam *- He is supporting all these seven worlds. He is the controller and supporter of all these worlds. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Bhooh iti | Sapta lokaan bibharti iti sheshah | ***





## 81
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 81:    
Loka aatma moortih sarveshaam poorveshaam api poorvajah |   
Aadhaarah sarva bhootaanaam svayam eva harih sthitah ||*** All the worlds are His form only. He Himself is there. Everything is His *shareera*, is told as *visheshana*, and He is *visheshya*. Even though everything is His *shareera*, He does not undergo any change; the change is only in the *visheshana*, which is His *shareera*. Everything is inseparably associated with Him. He is *upaadaana kaarana*. He is the support for all the beings. He Himself is present in all these forms. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Lokaatma moortih iti | Lokaa aatma moortih yasya sah lokaatma   
moortih | ***





## 82
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 82:  *** [[676]] ***Deva maanusha pashu aadi svaroopaih bahubhih sthitah |   
Tatah sarveshvaro ananto bhoota moortih amoortimaan || ***He is present in various forms, in the form of *deva, manushya, pashu*. All are His forms only, His *prakaara*, being His *shareera*, and He is *prakaari*. He is everywhere, all pervasive; all are His forms only; and He, being *antaryaami*, is present unseen by anyone. 





## 83
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 83:    
Rucho yajoomshi saamaani tathaa eva atharvanaani vai |   
Itihaasa upavedaah cha vedaanteshu tathoktayah ||*** Now, the *shabda svaroopa*, He is present as *shabda moorti* dharah, is going to be told. All the *Vedaas*, and *shabdaas* are His form only. *Rk, Yajus, **Saama, Atharva *- the *Vedaas, Ithhaasaas - Mahaabhaarata, Upaveda - **Aayurveda, Dhanurveda, Gaandharvaveda, Dandaneeti*; and *Vedaanta *- are His form only. 



*Vedaanta* is told separately, compared to *Rk, Yajus, Saama, Atharva*, because of its importance. *Bhagavat svaroopa* is established separately there. In our *siddhaanta, Poorva Kaanda* and *Uttara Kaanda* are given equal importance. This is established very clearly in *Sri Bhaashya, Vedaartha **Sangraha*, of *Bhagavad Ramanuja*, and all the *Aachaaryaas* that the entire *Veda* is given equal importance. *Poorva Kaanda* is *Bhagavat **Aaraadhana prakaara*, and *Uttara Kaanda* is telling *Bhagavat Svaroopa*. Because *Bhagavat Svaroopa* and *Upaasanaa* are coming, the *upaaya* is told; this is why *Vedaanta* is told separately. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Rucha iti | Itihaaso bhaarataadih | Upavedaah aayur dhanurveda   
gaandharva dandaneetayah | Vedaanteshu iti pruthak grahanam   
praashastyaat | ***





## 84
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 84:    
Vedaangaani samastaani manvaadi gaditaani cha |   
Shaastraani asheshaani aakhyaanaani anuvaakaah cha ye kvachit || ***All the *Vedaangaas \(Shikshaa, Vyaakarana, Chandas, Nirukta, Jyoutisha, **Kalpa\)*, and *Manu Dharma Shaastra, Manu Smruti*, all the *Dharma* [[677]] *Shaastraas*, the *Aakhyaanaas* like *Souparnaakhyaana*, and the *Anuvaakaas **\(Anuvaaka* is collection of *Sooktaas*, and a *Sookta* is collection of *Rng **Mantraas*\), collection of *Yajus mantraas*, said to be *Anuvaaka *- all these are *Bhagavaan* only. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Vedaangaani iti | Aakhyaanaani souparnaadeeni | Ruk samooha   
visheshah sooktam | Sookta samooho anuvaakah, yajussamoohah cha | ***





## 85
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 85:    
Kaavyaalaapaah cha ye kechit geethakaani akhilaani cha |   
Shabda moorti dharasya etat vapuh vishnoh mahaatmanah || ****Kaavyaas, prabandhaas, geetha *- all are *shareera, vapu* of *Mahaa Vishnu*. 



*Bhaashyakaarar* says that the *lakshana* for *shareera* is that it is a *dravya*. How can *shabda* be called as *vapu*, because *shabda* is not a *dravya*. This is explained as *Vedaabhimaani devataa*. For all these, there are *abhimaani **devataas*. When we say *vapu, shareera*, the *abhimaani devataas* are to be taken. This is how it is explained. All the *Vedaas* are supported by *Bhagavaan* only, as *Swami Deshikan* says. During *praakruta pralaya*, even *Chaturmukha Brahma* does not exist. *Vedaas* are said to be *nitya*, and are said be there in *Bhagavaan's jnyaana*. When *Bhagvaan* does the *srushti* again, *Bhagavaan* teaches *Chaturmukha Brahma*, in the same way as it was earlier. This *nityatva* is what makes the *Vedaas apourusheya*. Then *Chaturmukha Brahma* teaches to all the *rishis*. He also creates the *rishis* based on the previous *karmaas, sukrutaas*, by which they do *tapas* and *saakshaatkaara* of *Veda bhaagaas*. So, *Vedaas* are all existing as it is, and is not created by *Bhagavaan*; but He does *upadesha. Vedaas* will always be there in *Bhagavaan's jnyaana*, in the same form all the time, and will never change; the order is most important. *Bhaashyakaarar* says in *Vedaartha Sangraha* that the *loukika shabdaas* and *Vaidika shabdaas* are all coming from *Vedaas* only. The difference is that in the *loukika shabdaas*, there is no *aanupoorvi nityatva*, no *krama nityatva*. Whereas *Vedaas* are always being taught in the same order, in the *guru shishya paramparaa*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary: *** [[678]] ***Kaavyaalaapaah iti | Geetakaani maatrukaa prabandhaadeeni |*** 





## 86
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 86:    
Yaani moortaani amoortaani yaani atra anyatra vaa kvachit |   
Santi vai vastu jaataani taani sarvaani tat vapuh ||*** This is the conclusion that everything is His *vapu, shareera*. There is *aadhaara aadheya bhaava, niyaamaka niyaamya bhaava, sheshi shesha **bhaava *- these are the three relationships. Everything, all objects, whatever exist here, there, anywhere, *moorta, amoorta*, whether it is in the gross or subtle state, is all His *shareera*. All are controlled by Him, supported by Him, and for His purpose. 





## 87
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 87:    
Aham harih sarvam idam janaardano naanyat tatah kaarana kaarya   
jaatam |   
Eedrungmano yasya na tasya bhooyo bhavodbhavaa dvandva gadaa   
bhavanti || ***This is like ' *Aham Brahmaasmi', 'Tat tvam asi*'. Here, *aham* means that it is *jeevaatman, pratyagaatman. Aham harih menas aham **brahmaatmakah,* and *aham tat shareerakah*, that I have *Hari* as my *aatman*, I am the *shareera* for *Hari*. Everything is *Janaardana* means that everything is *shareera* of *Janaardana*. There is nothing which is effect or cause which is other than Him. Everything is inseparably associated with Him in *shareera **shareeri bhaava*. One who does this kind of *anusandhaana*, one who fully realizes this, he will not suffer from the dualities of this life creation again; all the sufferings due to duality, which are coming from this *samsaara*, will not happen to such a person who realizes this fully and does this kind of *anusandhaana*. 



***Sri Engal Aalwaan's Commentary:   
Aham harih iti | Aham arthah pratyagaatmaa, so api harih tat   
shareeraka iti arthah | ***





## 88
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 88:    
Ityesha te amshah prathamah puraanasya asya vai dvija |   
Yathaavat kathito yasmin dhrute \(shrute\) paapaih pramuchyate || *** [[679]] Now, *Paraasharar* concludes this *Prathama Amsha*. This is the First *Amsha* in this *Vishnu Puraana*, which was told to you by me, O *Maitreya*. I have taught you as it is. In whom all these meanings are well established, he will get rid of all the sins. 





## 89
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 89:    
Kaartikyaam poushkara snaane dvaadasha aabdena yat phalam |   
Tat asya shravaanaat sarvam maitreya aapnoti maanavah ||*** One who listens to this First *Amsha* of this *Puraana Rathna*, he will get the fruits, *phala* which comes. There are two interpretations for this - the *Kaartika maasa Pushkara snaana* once in twelve years, is said to be very sacred; one who takes bath in that, is one meaning; the other meaning is for twelve years, every year, during *Kaartika maasa* taking *Pushkara snaana*. The fruit which he gets will come to one who listens to this First *Amsha* of *Vishnu Puraana*. O *Maitreya*, all this *phala* one gets by listening to this *Amsha* itself. 



This is the *Phala Shruti*. Listening itself is so auspicious, and does all good. 





## 90
***Sri Vishnu Puraana, Amsha 1, Chapter 22, Shloka 90:    
Devarshi pitru gandharva yaksha aadeenaam cha sambhavam |   
Bhavanti shrunvatah pumso devaadyaa varadaa mune || ***What is the purpose of listening to this - that *devaas* were created, *rishis* were created, etc. All the creation of *devaas, rishis, **gandharvaas, yakshaas *- one who listens to all this - to him all the *devaas* will give all kinds of boons. 



This concludes the Twenty Second Chapter of First *Amsha*. 



***|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraane Prathame Amshe Dvaavimsho Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Iti Sri Vishnu Puraana Vyaakhyaane Sri Vishnu Chitteeye Prathame   
Amshe Dvaavimsho Adhyaayah ||   
   
|| Samaaptam cha prathama amsha vyaakhyaanam ||   
 *** [[680]] ***|| Iti Sri Paraashara Muni Virachite Sri Vishnu Paratva Nirnaayake   
Shreemati Sri Vishnu Puraane Prathamo Amshah Samaaptah || ***



This *Vishnu Puraana* which establishes what is *Para Tattva*, in this, the First *Amsha* comes to an end. 





 [[681]] 





i **www.sadagopan.org** Sincere thanks to: SrI Nrsimha Seva Rasikan, Oppiliappan Koil SrI V.Sadagopan SvAmi for hosting this title in his website, sadagopan.org Cover Picture: Sri Bhumidevi ThAyAr sametha Sri Oppiliappan Swamy Inset at bottom: Swamy Desikan as GantAvatAran Cover Design and eBook assembly by: Sri Murali Desikachari Released on: Sarvari Varusham, Purattasi SravaNam, Thirunakshatra Mahotsava Dinam of Thiruvenkatamudayan & Swamy Desikan \(27th September, 2020\) ii **www.sadagopan.org** 



iii **www.sadagopan.org** **Sri Vishnu Puraana ****Classes conducted online by ****Sri A Narasimhan****Notes prepared by Dr Amarnath ****Organized by Sri Tirunarayana Trust in memory of ****Mahavidvaan U Ve Sri V T Tirunarayana Iyengar Swamy ***\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\** *Sri Tirunarayana Trust, ShanbagaDhama-Yaduvanam* *Villa 16, Brigade PalmGrove,Bogadi Road **Mysuru 570026. India. **Tel:91-97311 09114 **Trust Website: www.tirunarayana.in* *Sri Vishnu Purana Class Notes: **https://groups.google.com/forum/\





v **www.sadagopan.org** **SrI VishNu PurANam \(Vol. 2\) *****|| Atha Dviteeya Amshah ||*** Now the Second *Amsha*. ***|| Atha Prathamo Adhyaayah ||   
Priyavratas Lineage***Now the First Chapter of Second *Amsha*. 