+++
title = "०६"
+++
CHAPTER SIX

This chapter describes how the Lord appeared before the demigods when they offered Him their prayers. Following the advice of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demigods executed a truce with the demons for the purpose of churning nectar from the sea.

Because of the prayers offered by the demigods in the previous chapter, Lord Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu was pleased with the demigods, and thus He appeared before them. The demigods were almost blinded by His transcendental bodily effulgence. At first, therefore, they could not even see any part of His body. After some time, however, when Brahmā could see the Lord, he, along with Lord Śiva, began to offer the Lord prayers.

Lord Brahmā said: “The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being beyond birth and death, is eternal. He has no material qualities. Yet He is the ocean of unlimited auspicious qualities. He is subtler than the most subtle, He is invisible, and His form is inconceivable. He is worshipable for all the demigods. Innumerable universes exist within His form, and therefore He is never separated from these universes by time, space or circumstances. He is the chief and the *pradhāna.* Although He is the beginning, the middle and the end of the material creation, the idea of pantheism conceived by Māyāvādī philosophers has no validity. The Supreme Personality of Godhead controls the entire material manifestation through His subordinate agent, the external energy. Because of His inconceivable transcendental position, He is always the master of the material energy. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His various forms, is always present even within this material world, but the material qualities cannot touch Him. One can understand His position only by His instructions, as given in *Bhagavad-gītā.*” As stated in *Bhagavad-gītā* (10.10), *dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ tam.* *Buddhi-yoga* means *bhakti-yoga.* Only through the process of *bhakti-yoga* can one understand the Supreme Lord.

When offered prayers by Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā, the Supreme Personality of Godhead was pleased. Thus He gave appropriate instructions to all the demigods. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as Ajita, unconquerable, advised the demigods to make a peace proposal to the demons, so that after formulating a truce, the demigods and demons could churn the Ocean of Milk. The rope would be the biggest serpent, known as Vāsuki, and the churning rod would be Mandara Mountain. Poison would also be produced from the churning, but it would be taken by Lord Śiva, and so there would be no need to fear it. Many other attractive things would be generated by the churning, but the Lord warned the demigods not to be captivated by such things. Nor should the demigods be angry if there were some disturbances. After advising the demigods in this way, the Lord disappeared from the scene.

Following the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demigods established a peace with Mahārāja Bali, the King of the demons. Then both the demons and the demigods started for the ocean, taking Mandara Mountain with them. Because of the great heaviness of the mountain, the demigods and demons became fatigued, and some of them actually died. Then the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, appeared there on the back of His carrier, Garuḍa, and by His mercy He brought these demigods and demons back to life. The Lord then lifted the mountain with one of His hands and placed it on the back of Garuḍa. The Lord sat on the mountain and was carried to the spot of the churning by Garuḍa, who placed the mountain near the sea. Then the Lord asked Garuḍa to leave that place because as long as Garuḍa was present, Vāsuki could not come there.

## Text 1

### Devanagari

श्रीशुक उवाच  
एवं स्तुत- सुरगणैर्भगवान् हरिरीश्वर- ।  
तेषामाविरभूद् राजन्सहस्रार्कोदयद्युति- ॥ १ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-śuka uvāca  
*evaṁ stutaḥ sura-gaṇair  
bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ  
teṣām āvirabhūd rājan  
sahasrārkodaya-dyutiḥ*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*śukaḥ* *uvāca* — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; *evam* — in this way; *stutaḥ* — being worshiped by prayers; *sura*-*gaṇaiḥ* — by the demigods; *bhagavān* — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; *hariḥ* — the vanquisher of all inauspiciousness; *īśvaraḥ* — the supreme controller; *teṣām* — in front of Lord Brahmā and all the demigods; *āvirabhūt* — appeared there; *rājan* — O King (Parīkṣit); *sahasra* — of thousands; *arka* — of suns; *udaya* — like the rising; *dyutiḥ* — His effulgence.

### Translation

**Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, being thus worshiped with prayers by the demigods and Lord Brahmā, appeared before them. His bodily effulgence resembled the simultaneous rising of thousands of suns.**

## Text 2

### Devanagari

### Verse text

*tenaiva sahasā sarve  
devāḥ pratihatekṣaṇāḥ  
nāpaśyan khaṁ diśaḥ kṣauṇīm  
ātmānaṁ ca kuto vibhum*

### Synonyms

*tena* *eva* — because of this; *sahasā* — all of a sudden; *sarve* — all; *devāḥ* — the demigods; *pratihata*-*īkṣaṇāḥ* — their vision being blocked; *na* — not; *apaśyan* — could see; *kham* — the sky; *diśaḥ* — the directions; *kṣauṇīm* — land; *ātmānam* *ca* — also themselves; *kutaḥ* — and where is the question of seeing; *vibhum* — the Supreme Lord.

### Translation

**The vision of all the demigods was blocked by the Lord’s effulgence. Thus they could see neither the sky, the directions, the land, nor even themselves, what to speak of seeing the Lord, who was present before them.**

## Texts 3-7

### Devanagari

विरिञ्चो भगवान्‍द‍ृष्ट्वा सह शर्वेण तां तनुम् ।  
स्वच्छां मरकतश्यामां कञ्जगर्भारुणेक्षणाम् ॥ ३ ॥  
तप्तहेमावदातेन लसत्कौशेयवाससा ।  
प्रसन्नचारुसर्वाङ्गीं सुमुखीं सुन्दरभ्रुवम् ॥ ४ ॥  
महामणिकिरीटेन केयूराभ्यां च भूषिताम् ।  
कर्णाभरणनिर्भातकपोलश्रीमुखाम्बुजाम् ॥ ५ ॥  
काञ्चीकलापवलयहारनूपुरशोभिताम् ।  
कौस्तुभाभरणां लक्ष्मीं बिभ्रतीं वनमालिनीम् ॥ ६ ॥  
सुदर्शनादिभि- स्वास्त्रैर्मूर्तिमद्भ‍िरुपासिताम् ।  
तुष्टाव देवप्रवर- सशर्व- पुरुषं परम् ।  
सर्वामरगणै- साकं सर्वाङ्गैरवनिं गतै- ॥ ७ ॥

### Verse text

*viriñco bhagavān dṛṣṭvā  
saha śarveṇa tāṁ tanum  
svacchāṁ marakata-śyāmāṁ  
kañja-garbhāruṇekṣaṇām*

*tapta-hemāvadātena  
lasat-kauśeya-vāsasā  
prasanna-cāru-sarvāṅgīṁ  
sumukhīṁ sundara-bhruvam*

*mahā-maṇi-kirīṭena  
keyūrābhyāṁ ca bhūṣitām  
karṇābharaṇa-nirbhāta-  
kapola-śrī-mukhāmbujām*

*kāñcīkalāpa-valaya-  
hāra-nūpura-śobhitām  
kaustubhābharaṇāṁ lakṣmīṁ  
bibhratīṁ vana-mālinīm*

*sudarśanādibhiḥ svāstrair  
mūrtimadbhir upāsitām  
tuṣṭāva deva-pravaraḥ  
saśarvaḥ puruṣaṁ param  
sarvāmara-gaṇaiḥ sākaṁ  
sarvāṅgair avaniṁ gataiḥ*

### Synonyms

*viriñcaḥ* — Lord Brahmā; *bhagavān* — who is also addressed as *bhagavān* because of his powerful position; *dṛṣṭvā* — by seeing; *saha* — with; *śarveṇa* — Lord Śiva; *tām* — unto the Supreme Lord; *tanum* — His transcendental form; *svacchām* — without material contamination; *marakata*-*śyāmām* — with a bodily luster like the light of a blue gem; *kañja*-*garbha*-*aruṇa*-*īkṣaṇām* — with pinkish eyes like the womb of a lotus flower; *tapta*-*hema*-*avadātena* — with a luster like that of molten gold; *lasat* — shining; *kauśeya*-*vāsasā* — dressed in yellow silk garments; *prasanna*-*cāru*-*sarva*-*aṅgīm* — all the parts of whose body were graceful and very beautiful; *su*-*mukhīm* — with a smiling face; *sundara*-*bhruvam* — whose eyebrows were very beautifully situated; *mahā*-*maṇi*-*kirīṭena* — with a helmet bedecked with valuable jewels; *keyūrābhyām* *ca* *bhūṣitām* — decorated with all kinds of ornaments; *karṇa*-*ābharaṇa*-*nirbhāta* — illuminated by the rays of the jewels on His ears; *kapola* — with cheeks; *śrī*-*mukha*-*ambujām* — whose beautiful lotuslike face; *kāñcī*-*kalāpa*-*valaya* — ornaments like the belt on the waist and bangles on the hands; *hāra*-*nūpura* — with a necklace on the chest and ankle bells on the legs; *śobhitām* — all beautifully set; *kaustubha*-*ābharaṇām* — whose chest was decorated with the Kaustubha gem; *lakṣmīm* — the goddess of fortune; *bibhratīm* — moving; *vana*-*mālinīm* — with flower garlands; *sudarśana*-*ādibhiḥ* — bearing the Sudarśana *cakra* and others; *sva*-*astraiḥ* — with His weapons; *mūrtimadbhiḥ* — in His original form; *upāsitām* — being worshiped; *tuṣṭāva* — satisfied; *deva*-*pravaraḥ* — the chief of the demigods; *sa*-*śarvaḥ* — with Lord Śiva; *puruṣam* *param* — the Supreme Personality; *sarva*-*amara*-*gaṇaiḥ* — accompanied by all the demigods; *sākam* — with; *sarva*-*aṅgaiḥ* — with all the parts of the body; *avanim* — on the ground; *gataiḥ* — prostrated.

### Translation

**Lord Brahmā, along with Lord Śiva, saw the crystal-clear personal beauty of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose blackish body resembles a marakata gem, whose eyes are reddish like the depths of a lotus, who is dressed with garments that are yellow like molten gold, and whose entire body is attractively decorated. They saw His beautiful, smiling, lotuslike face, crowned by a helmet bedecked with valuable jewels. The Lord has attractive eyebrows, and His cheeks are adorned with earrings. Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva saw the belt on the Lord’s waist, the bangles on His arms, the necklace on His chest, and the ankle bells on His legs. The Lord is bedecked with flower garlands, His neck is decorated with the Kaustubha gem, and He carries with Him the goddess of fortune and His personal weapons, like His disc and club. When Lord Brahmā, along with Lord Śiva and the other demigods, thus saw the form of the Lord, they all immediately fell to the ground, offering their obeisances.**

## Text 8

### Devanagari

श्रीब्रह्मोवाच  
अजातजन्मस्थितिसंयमाया-  
गुणाय निर्वाणसुखार्णवाय ।  
अणोरणिम्नेऽपरिगण्यधाम्ने

### Verse text

śrī-brahmovāca  
*ajāta-janma-sthiti-saṁyamāyā-  
guṇāya nirvāṇa-sukhārṇavāya  
aṇor aṇimne ’parigaṇya-dhāmne  
mahānubhāvāya namo namas te*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*brahmā* *uvāca* — Lord Brahmā said; *ajāta*-*janma*-*sthiti*-*saṁyamāya* — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is never born but whose appearance in different incarnations never ceases; *aguṇāya* — never affected by the material modes of nature (*sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa* and *tamo-guṇa*); *nirvāṇa*-*sukha*-*arṇavāya* — unto the ocean of eternal bliss, beyond material existence; *aṇoḥ* *aṇimne* — smaller than the atom; *aparigaṇya*-*dhāmne* — whose bodily features are never to be conceived by material speculation; *mahā*-*anubhāvāya* — whose existence is inconceivable; *namaḥ* — offering our obeisances; *namaḥ* — again offering our obeisances; *te* — unto You.

### Translation

**Lord Brahmā said: Although You are never born, Your appearance and disappearance as an incarnation never cease. You are always free from the material qualities, and You are the shelter of transcendental bliss resembling an ocean. Eternally existing in Your transcendental form, You are the supreme subtle of the most extremely subtle. We therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme, whose existence is inconceivable.**

### Purport

The Lord says in *Bhagavad-gītā* (4.6):

*ajo ’pi sann avyayātmā  
bhūtānām īśvaro ’pi san  
prakṛtiṁ svām adhiṣṭhāya  
sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā*

“Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in every millennium in My original transcendental form.” In the following verse in *Bhagavad-gītā* (4.7), the Lord says:

*yadā yadā hi dharmasya  
glānir bhavati bhārata  
abhyutthānam adharmasya  
tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham*

“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion — at that time I descend Myself.” Thus although the Supreme Lord is unborn, there is no cessation to His appearance in different forms as incarnations like Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Rāma. Since His incarnations are eternal, the various activities performed by these incarnations are also eternal. The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not appear because He is forced to do so by *karma* like ordinary living entities who are forced to accept a certain type of body. It is to be understood that the Lord’s body and activities are all transcendental, being free from the contamination of the material modes of nature. These pastimes are transcendental bliss to the Lord. The word *aparigaṇya-dhāmne* is very significant. There is no limit to the Lord’s appearance in different incarnations. All of these incarnations are eternal, blissful and full of knowledge.

## Text 9

### Devanagari

रूपं तवैतत् पुरुषर्षभेज्यं  
श्रेयोऽर्थिभिर्वैदिकतान्त्रिकेण ।  
योगेन धात- सह नस्त्रिलोकान्  
पश्याम्यमुष्मिन्नु ह विश्वमूर्तौ ॥ ९ ॥

### Verse text

*rūpaṁ tavaitat puruṣarṣabhejyaṁ  
śreyo ’rthibhir vaidika-tāntrikeṇa  
yogena dhātaḥ saha nas tri-lokān  
paśyāmy amuṣminn u ha viśva-mūrtau*

### Synonyms

*rūpam* — form; *tava* — Your; *etat* — this; *puruṣa*-*ṛṣabha* — O best of all personalities; *ijyam* — worshipable; *śreyaḥ* — ultimate auspiciousness; *arthibhiḥ* — by persons who desire; *vaidika* — under the direction of Vedic instructions; *tāntrikeṇa* — realized by followers of *Tantras,* like *Nārada-pañcarātra*; *yogena* — by practice of mystic *yoga*; *dhātaḥ* — O supreme director; *saha* — with; *naḥ* — us (the demigods); *tri*-*lokān* — controlling the three worlds; *paśyāmi* — we see directly; *amuṣmin* — in You; *u* — oh; *ha* — completely manifested; *viśva*-*mūrtau* — in You, who have the universal form.

### Translation

**O best of persons, O supreme director, those who actually aspire for supreme good fortune worship this form of Your Lordship according to the Vedic Tantras. My Lord, we can see all the three worlds in You.**

### Purport

The Vedic *mantras* say: *yasmin vijñāte sarvam evaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati* (*Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad* 1.3). When the devotee sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead by his meditation, or when he sees the Lord personally, face to face, he becomes aware of everything within this universe. Indeed, nothing is unknown to him. Everything within this material world is fully manifested to a devotee who has seen the Supreme Personality of Godhead. *Bhagavad-gītā* (4.34) therefore advises:

*tad viddhi praṇipātena  
paripraśnena sevayā  
upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ  
jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ*

“Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.” Lord Brahmā is one of these self-realized authorities (*svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ*). One must therefore accept the disciplic succession from Lord Brahmā, and then one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead in fullness. Here the word *viśva-mūrtau* indicates that everything exists in the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who is able to worship Him can see everything in Him and see Him in everything.

## Text 10

### Devanagari

त्वय्यग्र आसीत् त्वयि मध्य आसीत्  
त्वय्यन्त आसीदिदमात्मतन्त्रे ।  
त्वमादिरन्तो जगतोऽस्य मध्यं  
घटस्य मृत्स्‍नेव पर- परस्मात् ॥ १० ॥

### Verse text

*tvayy agra āsīt tvayi madhya āsīt  
tvayy anta āsīd idam ātma-tantre  
tvam ādir anto jagato ’sya madhyaṁ  
ghaṭasya mṛtsneva paraḥ parasmāt*

### Synonyms

*tvayi* — unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; *agre* — in the beginning; *āsīt* — there was; *tvayi* — unto You; *madhye* — in the middle; *āsīt* — there was; *tvayi* — unto You; *ante* — in the end; *āsīt* — there was; *idam* — all of this cosmic manifestation; *ātma*-*tantre* — fully under Your control; *tvam* — Your Lordship; *ādiḥ* — beginning; *antaḥ* — end; *jagataḥ* — of the cosmic manifestation; *asya* — of this; *madhyam* — middle; *ghaṭasya* — of an earthen pot; *mṛtsnā* *iva* — like the earth; *paraḥ* — transcendental; *parasmāt* — because of being the chief.

### Translation

**My dear Lord, who are always fully independent, this entire cosmic manifestation arises from You, rests upon You and ends in You. Your Lordship is the beginning, sustenance and end of everything, like the earth, which is the cause of an earthen pot, which supports the pot, and to which the pot, when broken, finally returns.**

## Text 11

### Devanagari

त्वं माययात्माश्रयया स्वयेदं  
निर्माय विश्वं तदनुप्रविष्ट- ।  
पश्यन्ति युक्ता मनसा मनीषिणो  
गुणव्यवायेऽप्यगुणं विपश्चित- ॥ ११ ॥

### Verse text

*tvaṁ māyayātmāśrayayā svayedaṁ  
nirmāya viśvaṁ tad-anupraviṣṭaḥ  
paśyanti yuktā manasā manīṣiṇo  
guṇa-vyavāye ’py aguṇaṁ vipaścitaḥ*

### Synonyms

*tvam* — Your Lordship; *māyayā* — by Your eternal energy; *ātma*-*āśrayayā* — whose existence is under Your shelter; *svayā* — emanated from Yourself; *idam* — this; *nirmāya* — for the sake of creating; *viśvam* — the entire universe; *tat* — into it; *anupraviṣṭaḥ* — You enter; *paśyanti* — they see; *yuktāḥ* — persons in touch with You; *manasā* — by an elevated mind; *manīṣiṇaḥ* — people with advanced consciousness; *guṇa* — of material qualities; *vyavāye* — in the transformation; *api* — although; *aguṇam* — still untouched by the material qualities; *vipaścitaḥ* — those who are fully aware of the truth of *śāstra.*.

### Translation

**O Supreme, You are independent in Your self and do not take help from others. Through Your own potency, You create this cosmic manifestation and enter into it. Those who are advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, who are fully in knowledge of the authoritative śāstra, and who, through the practice of bhakti-yoga, are cleansed of all material contamination, can see with clear minds that although You exist within the transformations of the material qualities, Your presence is untouched by these qualities.**

### Purport

The Lord says in *Bhagavad-gītā* (9.10):

*mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ  
sūyate sacarācaram  
hetunānena kaunteya  
jagad viparivartate*

“This material nature, working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.” The material energy creates, maintains and devastates the entire cosmic manifestation because of directions given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who enters this universe as Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu but is untouched by the material qualities. In *Bhagavad-gītā* the Lord refers to *māyā,* the external energy, which creates this material world, as *mama māyā,* “My energy,” because this energy works under the full control of the Lord. These facts can be realized only by those who are well versed in Vedic knowledge and advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

## Text 12

### Devanagari

यथाग्निमेधस्यमृतं च गोषु  
भुव्यन्नमम्बूद्यमने च वृत्तिम् ।  
योगैर्मनुष्या अधियन्ति हि त्वां  
गुणेषु बुद्ध्या कवयो वदन्ति ॥ १२ ॥

### Verse text

*yathāgnim edhasy amṛtaṁ ca goṣu  
bhuvy annam ambūdyamane ca vṛttim  
yogair manuṣyā adhiyanti hi tvāṁ  
guṇeṣu buddhyā kavayo vadanti*

### Synonyms

*yathā* — as; *agnim* — fire; *edhasi* — in wood; *amṛtam* — milk, which is like nectar; *ca* — and; *goṣu* — from cows; *bhuvi* — on the ground; *annam* — food grains; *ambu* — water; *udyamane* — in enterprise; *ca* — also; *vṛttim* — livelihood; *yogaiḥ* — by practice of *bhakti-yoga*; *manuṣyāḥ* — human beings; *adhiyanti* — achieve; *hi* — indeed; *tvām* — You; *guṇeṣu* — in the material modes of nature; *buddhyā* — by intelligence; *kavayaḥ* — great personalities; *vadanti* — say.

### Translation

**As one can derive fire from wood, milk from the milk bag of the cow, food grains and water from the land, and prosperity in one’s livelihood from industrial enterprises, so, by the practice of bhakti-yoga, even within this material world, one can achieve Your favor or intelligently approach You. Those who are pious all affirm this.**

### Purport

Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead is *nirguṇa,* not to be found within this material world, the entire material world is pervaded by Him, as stated in *Bhagavad-gītā* (*mayā tatam idaṁ sarvam*). The material world is nothing but an expansion of the Lord’s material energy, and the entire cosmic manifestation rests upon Him (*mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni*). Nonetheless, the Supreme Lord cannot be found here (*na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ*). A devotee, however, can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the practice of *bhakti-yoga.* One ordinarily does not begin to practice *bhakti-yoga* unless he has practiced it in previous births. Moreover, one can begin *bhakti-yoga* only by the mercy of the spiritual master and Kṛṣṇa. *Guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja.* The seed of devotional service is obtainable by the mercy of *guru,* the spiritual master, and Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Only by the practice of *bhakti-yoga* can one achieve the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and see Him face to face (*premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti*). One cannot see the Lord by other methods, such as *karma, jñāna* or *yoga.* Under the direction of the spiritual master, one must cultivate *bhakti-yoga* (*śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam*). Then, even within this material world, although the Lord is not visible, a devotee can see Him. This is confirmed in *Bhagavad-gītā* (*bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ*) and in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (*bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ*). Thus by devotional service one can achieve the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although He is not visible or understandable to materialistic persons.

In this verse, the cultivation of *bhakti-yoga* is compared to many material activities. By friction one can get fire from wood, by digging the earth one can get food grains and water, and by agitating the milk bag of the cow one can get nectarean milk. Milk is compared to nectar, which one can drink to become immortal. Of course, simply drinking milk will not make one immortal, but it can increase the duration of one’s life. In modern civilization, men do not think milk to be important, and therefore they do not live very long. Although in this age men can live up to one hundred years, their duration of life is reduced because they do not drink large quantities of milk. This is a sign of Kali-yuga. In Kali-yuga, instead of drinking milk, people prefer to slaughter an animal and eat its flesh. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His instructions of *Bhagavad-gītā,* advises *go-rakṣya,* which means cow protection. The cow should be protected, milk should be drawn from the cows, and this milk should be prepared in various ways. One should take ample milk, and thus one can prolong one’s life, develop his brain, execute devotional service, and ultimately attain the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As it is essential to get food grains and water by digging the earth, it is also essential to give protection to the cows and take nectarean milk from their milk bags.

The people of this age are inclined toward industrial enterprises for comfortable living, but they refuse to endeavor to execute devotional service, by which they can achieve the ultimate goal of life by returning home, back to Godhead. Unfortunately, as it is said, *na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ.* People without spiritual education do not know that the ultimate goal of life is to go back home, back to Godhead. Forgetting this aim of life, they are working very hard in disappointment and frustration (*moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo mogha jñānā vicetasaḥ*). The so-called *vaiśyas* — the industrialists or businessmen — are involved in big, big industrial enterprises, but they are not interested in food grains and milk. However, as indicated here, by digging for water, even in the desert, we can produce food grains; when we produce food grains and vegetables, we can give protection to the cows; while giving protection to the cows, we can draw from them abundant quantities of milk; and by getting enough milk and combining it with food grains and vegetables, we can prepare hundreds of nectarean foods. We can happily eat this food and thus avoid industrial enterprises and joblessness.

Agriculture and cow protection are the way to become sinless and thus be attracted to devotional service. Those who are sinful cannot be attracted by devotional service. As stated in *Bhagavad-gītā* (7.28):

*yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ  
janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām  
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā  
bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ*

“Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination.” The majority of people in this Age of Kali are sinful, short-living, unfortunate and disturbed (*mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ*). For them, Caitanya Mahāprabhu has advised:

*harer nāma harer nāma  
harer nāmaiva kevalam  
kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva  
nāsty eva gatir anyathā*

“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way. There is no other way.”

## Text 13

### Devanagari

तं त्वां वयं नाथ समुज्जिहानं  
सरोजनाभातिचिरेप्सितार्थम् ।  
द‍ृष्ट्वा गता निर्वृतमद्य सर्वे  
गजा दवार्ता इव गाङ्गमम्भ- ॥ १३ ॥

### Verse text

*taṁ tvāṁ vayaṁ nātha samujjihānaṁ  
saroja-nābhāticirepsitārtham  
dṛṣṭvā gatā nirvṛtam adya sarve  
gajā davārtā iva gāṅgam ambhaḥ*

### Synonyms

*tam* — O Lord; *tvām* — Your Lordship; *vayam* — all of us; *nātha* — O master; *samujjihānam* — now appearing before us with all glories; *saroja*-*nābha* — O Lord, whose navel resembles a lotus flower, or from whose navel grows a lotus flower; *ati*-*cira* — for an extremely long time; *īpsita* — desiring; *artham* — for the ultimate goal of life; *dṛṣṭvā* — seeing; *gatāḥ* — in our vision; *nirvṛtam* — transcendental happiness; *adya* — today; *sarve* — all of us; *gajāḥ* — elephants; *dava*-*artāḥ* — being afflicted in a forest fire; *iva* — like; *gāṅgam* *ambhaḥ* — with water from the Ganges.

### Translation

**Elephants afflicted by a forest fire become very happy when they get water from the Ganges. Similarly, O my Lord, from whose navel grows a lotus flower, since You have now appeared before us, we have become transcendentally happy. By seeing Your Lordship, whom we have desired to see for a very long time, we have achieved our ultimate goal in life.**

### Purport

The devotees of the Lord are always very eager to see the Supreme Lord face to face, but they do not demand that the Lord come before them, for a pure devotee considers such a demand to be contrary to devotional service. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches this lesson in His *Śikṣāṣṭaka.* *Adarśanān marma-hatāṁ karotu vā.* The devotee is always eager to see the Lord face to face, but if he is brokenhearted because he cannot see the Lord, even life after life, he will never command the Lord to appear. This is a sign of pure devotion. Therefore in this verse we find the word *ati-cira-īpsita-artham,* meaning that the devotee aspires for a long, long time to see the Lord. If the Lord, by His own pleasure, appears before the devotee, the devotee feels extremely happy, as Dhruva Mahārāja felt when he personally saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When Dhruva Mahārāja saw the Lord, he had no desire to ask the Lord for any benediction. Indeed, simply by seeing the Lord, Dhruva Mahārāja felt so satisfied that he did not want to ask the Lord for any benediction (*svāmin kṛtārtho ’smi varaṁ na yāce*). A pure devotee, whether able or unable to see the Lord, always engages in the Lord’s devotional service, always hoping that at some time the Lord may be pleased to appear before him so that he can see the Lord face to face.

## Text 14

### Devanagari

स त्वं विधत्स्वाखिललोकपाला  
वयं यदर्थास्तव पादमूलम् ।  
समागतास्ते बहिरन्तरात्मन्  
किं वान्यविज्ञाप्यमशेषसाक्षिण- ॥ १४ ॥

### Verse text

*sa tvaṁ vidhatsvākhila-loka-pālā  
vayaṁ yad arthās tava pāda-mūlam  
samāgatās te bahir-antar-ātman  
kiṁ vānya-vijñāpyam aśeṣa-sākṣiṇaḥ*

### Synonyms

*saḥ* — that; *tvam* — Your Lordship; *vidhatsva* — kindly do the needful; *akhila*-*loka*-*pālāḥ* — the demigods, directors of different departments of this universe; *vayam* — all of us; *yat* — that which; *arthāḥ* — purpose; *tava* — at Your Lordship’s; *pāda*-*mūlam* — lotus feet; *samāgatāḥ* — we have arrived; *te* — unto You; *bahiḥ*-*antaḥ*-*ātman* — O Supersoul of everyone, O constant internal and external witness; *kim* — what; *vā* — either; *anya*-*vijñāpyam* — we have to inform You; *aśeṣa*-*sākṣiṇaḥ* — the witness and knower of everything.

### Translation

**My Lord, we, the various demigods, the directors of this universe, have come to Your lotus feet. Please fulfill the purpose for which we have come. You are the witness of everything, from within and without. Nothing is unknown to You, and therefore it is unnecessary to inform You again of anything.**

### Purport

As stated in *Bhagavad-gītā* (13.3), *kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata.* The individual souls are proprietors of their individual bodies, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the proprietor of all bodies. Since He is the witness of everyone’s body, nothing is unknown to Him. He knows what we need. Our duty, therefore, is to execute devotional service sincerely, under the direction of the spiritual master. Kṛṣṇa, by His grace, will supply whatever we need in executing our devotional service. In the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we simply have to execute the order of Kṛṣṇa and *guru.* Then all necessities will be supplied by Kṛṣṇa, even if we do not ask for them.

## Text 15

### Devanagari

अहं गिरित्रश्च सुरादयो ये  
दक्षादयोऽग्नेरिव केतवस्ते ।  
किं वा विदामेश पृथग्विभाता  
विधत्स्व शं नो द्विजदेवमन्त्रम् ॥ १५ ॥

### Verse text

*ahaṁ giritraś ca surādayo ye  
dakṣādayo ’gner iva ketavas te  
kiṁ vā vidāmeśa pṛthag-vibhātā  
vidhatsva śaṁ no dvija-deva-mantram*

### Synonyms

*aham* — I (Lord Brahmā); *giritraḥ* — Lord Śiva; *ca* — also; *sura*-*ādayaḥ* — all the demigods; *ye* — as we are; *dakṣa*-*ādayaḥ* — headed by Mahārāja Dakṣa; *agneḥ* — of fire; *iva* — like; *ketavaḥ* — sparks; *te* — of You; *kim* — what; *vā* — either; *vidāma* — can we understand; *īśa* — O my Lord; *pṛthak*-*vibhātāḥ* — independently of You; *vidhatsva* — kindly bestow upon us; *śam* — good fortune; *naḥ* — our; *dvija*-*deva*-*mantram* — the means of deliverance suitable for the *brāhmaṇas* and demigods.

### Translation

**I \[Lord Brahmā\], Lord Śiva and all the demigods, accompanied by the prajāpatis like Dakṣa, are nothing but sparks illuminated by You, who are the original fire. Since we are particles of You, what can we understand about our welfare? O Supreme Lord, please give us the means of deliverance that is suitable for the brāhmaṇas and demigods.**

### Purport

In this verse, the word *dvija-deva-mantram* is very important. The word *mantra* means “that which delivers one from the material world.” Only the *dvijas* (the *brāhmaṇas*) and the *devas* (the demigods) can be delivered from material existence by the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Whatever is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is a *mantra* and is suitable for delivering the conditioned souls from mental speculation. The conditioned souls are engaged in a struggle for existence (*manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati*). Deliverance from this struggle constitutes the highest benefit, but unless one gets a *mantra* from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, deliverance is impossible. The beginning *mantra* is the Gāyatrī *mantra.* Therefore, after purification, when one is qualified to become a *brāhmaṇa* (*dvija*), he is offered the Gāyatrī *mantra.* Simply by chanting the Gāyatrī *mantra,* one can be delivered. This *mantra,* however, is suitable only for the *brāhmaṇas* and demigods. In Kali-yuga, we are all in a very difficult position, in which we need a suitable *mantra* that can deliver us from the dangers of this age. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His incarnation as Lord Caitanya, gives us the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mantra.*

*harer nāma harer nāma  
harer nāmaiva kevalam  
kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva  
nāsty eva gatir anyathā*

“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way. There is no other way.” In His *Śikṣāṣṭaka,* Lord Caitanya says, *paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam:* “All glories to the chanting of *śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana*!” The *mahā-mantra* — Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare — is directly chanted by the Lord Himself, who gives us this *mantra* for deliverance.

We cannot invent any means to be delivered from the dangers of material existence. Here, even the demigods, such as Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, and the *prajāpatis,* such as Dakṣa, are said to be like illuminating sparks in the presence of the Supreme Lord, who is compared to a great fire. Sparks are beautiful as long as they are in the fire. Similarly, we have to remain in the association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and always engage in devotional service, for then we shall always be brilliant and illuminating. As soon as we fall from the service of the Lord, our brilliance and illumination will immediately be extinguished, or at least stopped for some time. When we living entities, who are like sparks of the original fire, the Supreme Lord, fall into a material condition, we must take the *mantra* from the Supreme Personality of Godhead as it is offered by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. By chanting this Hare Kṛṣṇa *mantra,* we shall be delivered from all the difficulties of this material world.

## Text 16

### Devanagari

श्रीशुक उवाच  
एवं विरिञ्चादिभिरीडितस्तद्  
विज्ञाय तेषां हृदयं यथैव ।  
जगाद जीमूतगभीरया गिरा  
बद्धाञ्जलीन्संवृतसर्वकारकान् ॥ १६ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-śuka uvāca  
*evaṁ viriñcādibhir īḍitas tad  
vijñāya teṣāṁ hṛdayaṁ yathaiva  
jagāda jīmūta-gabhīrayā girā  
baddhāñjalīn saṁvṛta-sarva-kārakān*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*śukaḥ* *uvāca* — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; *evam* — thus; *viriñca*-*ādibhiḥ* — by all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā; *īḍitaḥ* — being worshiped; *tat* *vijñāya* — understanding the expectation; *teṣām* — of all of them; *hṛdayam* — the core of the heart; *yathā* — as; *eva* — indeed; *jagāda* — replied; *jīmūta*-*gabhīrayā* — like the sound of clouds; *girā* — by words; *baddha*-*añjalīn* — unto the demigods, who stood with folded hands; *saṁvṛta* — restrained; *sarva* — all; *kārakān* — senses.

### Translation

**Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When the Lord was thus offered prayers by the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā, He understood the purpose for which they had approached Him. Therefore, in a deep voice that resembled the rumbling of clouds, the Lord replied to the demigods, who all stood there attentively with folded hands.**

## Text 17

### Devanagari

एक एवेश्वरस्तस्मिन्सुरकार्ये सुरेश्वर- ।  
विहर्तुकामस्तानाह समुद्रोन्मथनादिभि- ॥ १७ ॥

### Verse text

*eka eveśvaras tasmin  
sura-kārye sureśvaraḥ  
vihartu-kāmas tān āha  
samudronmathanādibhiḥ*

### Synonyms

*ekaḥ* — alone; *eva* — indeed; *īśvaraḥ* — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; *tasmin* — in that; *sura*-*kārye* — the activities of the demigods; *sura*-*īśvaraḥ* — the Lord of the demigods, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; *vihartu* — to enjoy pastimes; *kāmaḥ* — desiring; *tān* — unto the demigods; *āha* — said; *samudra*-*unmathana*-*ādibhiḥ* — by activities of churning the ocean.

### Translation

**Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of the demigods, was capable of performing the activities of the demigods by Himself, He wanted to enjoy pastimes in churning the ocean. Therefore He spoke as follows.**

## Text 18

### Devanagari

श्रीभगवानुवाच  
हन्त ब्रह्मन्नहो शम्भो हे देवा मम भाषितम् ।  
श‍ृणुतावहिता- सर्वे श्रेयो व- स्याद् यथा सुरा- ॥ १८ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-bhagavān uvāca  
*hanta brahmann aho śambho  
he devā mama bhāṣitam  
śṛṇutāvahitāḥ sarve  
śreyo vaḥ syād yathā surāḥ*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*bhagavān* *uvāca* — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; *hanta* — addressing them; *brahman* *aho* — O Lord Brahmā; *śambho* — O Lord Śiva; *he* — O; *devāḥ* — demigods; *mama* — My; *bhāṣitam* — statement; *śṛṇuta* — hear; *avahitāḥ* — with great attention; *sarve* — all of you; *śreyaḥ* — good fortune; *vaḥ* — for all of you; *syāt* — shall be; *yathā* — as; *surāḥ* — for the demigods.

### Translation

**The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and other demigods, please hear Me with great attention, for what I say will bring good fortune for all of you.**

## Text 19

### Devanagari

यात दानवदैतेयैस्तावत् सन्धिर्विधीयताम् ।  
कालेनानुगृहीतैस्तैर्यावद् वो भव आत्मन- ॥ १९ ॥

### Verse text

*yāta dānava-daiteyais  
tāvat sandhir vidhīyatām  
kālenānugṛhītais tair  
yāvad vo bhava ātmanaḥ*

### Synonyms

*yāta* — just execute; *dānava* — with the demons; *daiteyaiḥ* — and the *asuras*; *tāvat* — so long; *sandhiḥ* — a truce; *vidhīyatām* — execute; *kālena* — by a favorable time (or *kāvyena* — by Śukrācārya); *anugṛhītaiḥ* — receiving benedictions; *taiḥ* — with them; *yāvat* — as long as; *vaḥ* — of you; *bhavaḥ* — good fortune; *ātmanaḥ* — of yourselves.

### Translation

**As long as you are not flourishing, you should make a truce with the demons and asuras, who are now being favored by time.**

### Purport

One word in this verse has two readings — *kālena* and *kāvyena.* *Kālena* means “favored by time,” and *kāvyena* means “favored by Śukrācārya,” Śukrācārya being the spiritual master of the Daityas. The demons and Daityas were favored in both ways, and therefore the demigods were advised by the Supreme Lord to execute a truce for the time being, until time favored them.

## Text 20

### Devanagari

अरयोऽपि हि सन्धेया- सति कार्यार्थगौरवे ।  
अहिमूषिकवद् देवा ह्यर्थस्य पदवीं गतै- ॥ २० ॥

### Verse text

*arayo ’pi hi sandheyāḥ  
sati kāryārtha-gaurave  
ahi-mūṣikavad devā  
hy arthasya padavīṁ gataiḥ*

### Synonyms

*arayaḥ* — enemies; *api* — although; *hi* — indeed; *sandheyāḥ* — eligible for a truce; *sati* — being so; *kārya*-*artha*-*gaurave* — in the matter of an important duty; *ahi* — snake; *mūṣika* — mouse; *vat* — like; *devāḥ* — O demigods; *hi* — indeed; *arthasya* — of interest; *padavīm* — position; *gataiḥ* — so being.

### Translation

**O demigods, fulfilling one’s own interests is so important that one may even have to make a truce with one’s enemies. For the sake of one’s self-interest, one has to act according to the logic of the snake and the mouse.**

### Purport

A snake and a mouse were once caught in a basket. Now, since the mouse is food for the snake, this was a good opportunity for the snake. However, since both of them were caught in the basket, even if the snake ate the mouse, the snake would not be able to get out. Therefore, the snake thought it wise to make a truce with the mouse and ask the mouse to make a hole in the basket so that both of them could get out. The snake’s intention was that after the mouse made the hole, the snake would eat the mouse and escape from the basket through the hole. This is called the logic of the snake and the mouse.

## Text 21

### Devanagari

अमृतोत्पादने यत्न- क्रियतामविलम्बितम् ।  
यस्य पीतस्य वै जन्तुर्मृत्युग्रस्तोऽमरो भवेत् ॥ २१ ॥

### Verse text

*amṛtotpādane yatnaḥ  
kriyatām avilambitam  
yasya pītasya vai jantur  
mṛtyu-grasto ’maro bhavet*

### Synonyms

*amṛta*-*utpādane* — in generating nectar; *yatnaḥ* — endeavor; *kriyatām* — do; *avilambitam* — without delay; *yasya* — of which nectar; *pītasya* — anyone who drinks; *vai* — indeed; *jantuḥ* — living entity; *mṛtyu*-*grastaḥ* — although in imminent danger of death; *amaraḥ* — immortal; *bhavet* — can become.

### Translation

**Immediately endeavor to produce nectar, which a person who is about to die may drink to become immortal.**

## Texts 22-23

### Devanagari

क्षिप्‍त्वा क्षीरोदधौ सर्वा वीरुत्तृणलतौषधी- ।  
मन्थानं मन्दरं कृत्वा नेत्रं कृत्वा तु वासुकिम् ॥ २२ ॥  
सहायेन मया देवा निर्मन्थध्वमतन्द्रिता- ।  
क्लेशभाजो भविष्यन्ति दैत्या यूयं फलग्रहा- ॥ २३ ॥

### Verse text

*kṣiptvā kṣīrodadhau sarvā  
vīrut-tṛṇa-latauṣadhīḥ  
manthānaṁ mandaraṁ kṛtvā  
netraṁ kṛtvā tu vāsukim*

*sahāyena mayā devā  
nirmanthadhvam atandritāḥ  
kleśa-bhājo bhaviṣyanti  
daityā yūyaṁ phala-grahāḥ*

### Synonyms

*kṣiptvā* — putting; *kṣīra*-*udadhau* — in the Ocean of Milk; *sarvāḥ* — all kinds of; *vīrut* — creepers; *tṛṇa* — grass; *latā* — vegetables; *auṣadhīḥ* — and drugs; *manthānam* — the churning rod; *mandaram* — Mandara Mountain; *kṛtvā* — making; *netram* — the churning rope; *kṛtvā* — making; *tu* — but; *vāsukim* — the snake Vāsuki; *sahāyena* — with a helper; *mayā* — by Me; *devāḥ* — all the demigods; *nirmanthadhvam* — go on churning; *atandritāḥ* — very carefully, without diversion; *kleśa*-*bhājaḥ* — sharetakers of sufferings; *bhaviṣyanti* — will be; *daityāḥ* — the demons; *yūyam* — but all of you; *phala*-*grahāḥ* — gainers of the actual result.

### Translation

**O demigods, cast into the Ocean of Milk all kinds of vegetables, grass, creepers and drugs. Then, with My help, making Mandara Mountain the churning rod and Vāsuki the rope for churning, churn the Ocean of Milk with undiverted attention. Thus the demons will be engaged in labor, but you, the demigods, will gain the actual result, the nectar produced from the ocean.**

### Purport

It appears that when different kinds of drugs, creepers, grass and vegetables are put into this milk and the milk is churned, as milk is churned for butter, the active principles of the vegetables and drugs mix with the milk, and the result is nectar.

## Text 24

### Devanagari

यूयं तदनुमोदध्वं यदिच्छन्त्यसुरा- सुरा- ।  
न संरम्भेण सिध्यन्ति सर्वार्था- सान्‍त्वया यथा ॥ २४ ॥

### Verse text

*yūyaṁ tad anumodadhvaṁ  
yad icchanty asurāḥ surāḥ  
na saṁrambheṇa sidhyanti  
sarvārthāḥ sāntvayā yathā*

### Synonyms

*yūyam* — all of you; *tat* — that; *anumodadhvam* — should accept; *yat* — whatever; *icchanti* — they desire; *asurāḥ* — the demons; *surāḥ* — O demigods; *na* — not; *saṁrambheṇa* — by being agitated in anger; *sidhyanti* — are very successful; *sarva*-*arthāḥ* — all desired ends; *sāntvayā* — by peaceful execution; *yathā* — as.

### Translation

**My dear demigods, with patience and peace everything can be done, but if one is agitated by anger, the goal is not achieved. Therefore, whatever the demons ask, agree to their proposal.**

## Text 25

### Devanagari

न भेतव्यं कालकूटाद् विषाज्जलधिसम्भवात् ।  
लोभ- कार्यो न वो जातु रोष- कामस्तु वस्तुषु ॥ २५ ॥

### Verse text

*na bhetavyaṁ kālakūṭād  
viṣāj jaladhi-sambhavāt  
lobhaḥ kāryo na vo jātu  
roṣaḥ kāmas tu vastuṣu*

### Synonyms

*na* — not; *bhetavyam* — should be afraid; *kālakūṭāt* — of *kālakūṭa*; *viṣāt* — from the poison; *jaladhi* — from the Ocean of Milk; *sambhavāt* — which will appear; *lobhaḥ* — greed; *kāryaḥ* — execution; *na* — not; *vaḥ* — unto you; *jātu* — at any time; *roṣaḥ* — anger; *kāmaḥ* — lust; *tu* — and; *vastuṣu* — in the products.

### Translation

**A poison known as kālakūṭa will be generated from the Ocean of Milk, but you should not fear it. And when various products are churned from the ocean, you should not be greedy for them or anxious to obtain them, nor should you be angry.**

### Purport

It appears that by the churning process many things would be generated from the Ocean of Milk, including poison, valuable gems, nectar and many beautiful women. The demigods were advised, however, not to be greedy for the gems or beautiful women, but to wait patiently for the nectar. The real purpose was to get the nectar.

## Text 26

### Devanagari

श्रीशुक उवाच  
इति देवान्समादिश्य भगवान् पुरुषोत्तम- ।  
तेषामन्तर्दधे राजन्स्वच्छन्दगतिरीश्वर- ॥ २६ ॥

### Verse text

śrī-śuka uvāca  
*iti devān samādiśya  
bhagavān puruṣottamaḥ  
teṣām antardadhe rājan  
svacchanda-gatir īśvaraḥ*

### Synonyms

*śrī*-*śukaḥ* *uvāca* — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; *iti* — thus; *devān* — all the demigods; *samādiśya* — advising; *bhagavān* — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; *puruṣa*-*uttamaḥ* — the best of all persons; *teṣām* — from them; *antardadhe* — disappeared; *rājan* — O King; *svacchanda* — free; *gatiḥ* — whose movements; *īśvaraḥ* — the Personality of Godhead.

### Translation

**Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King Parīkṣit, after advising the demigods in this way, the independent Supreme Personality of Godhead, the best of all living entities, disappeared from their presence.**

## Text 27

### Devanagari

अथ तस्मै भगवते नमस्कृत्य पितामह- ।  
भवश्च जग्मतु- स्वं स्वं धामोपेयुर्बलिं सुरा- ॥ २७ ॥

### Verse text

*atha tasmai bhagavate  
namaskṛtya pitāmahaḥ  
bhavaś ca jagmatuḥ svaṁ svaṁ  
dhāmopeyur baliṁ surāḥ*

### Synonyms

*atha* — after this; *tasmai* — unto Him; *bhagavate* — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; *namaskṛtya* — offering obeisances; *pitā*-*mahaḥ* — Lord Brahmā; *bhavaḥ* *ca* — as well as Lord Śiva; *jagmatuḥ* — returned; *svam* *svam* — to their own; *dhāma* — abodes; *upeyuḥ* — approached; *balim* — King Bali; *surāḥ* — all the other demigods.

### Translation

**Then Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, after offering their respectful obeisances to the Lord, returned to their abodes. All the demigods then approached Mahārāja Bali.**

## Text 28

### Devanagari

द‍ृष्ट्वारीनप्यसंयत्ताञ्जातक्षोभान्स्वनायकान् ।  
न्यषेधद् दैत्यराट् श्लोक्य- सन्धिविग्रहकालवित् ॥ २८ ॥

### Verse text

*dṛṣṭvārīn apy asaṁyattāñ  
jāta-kṣobhān sva-nāyakān  
nyaṣedhad daitya-rāṭ ślokyaḥ  
sandhi-vigraha-kālavit*

### Synonyms

*dṛṣṭvā* — observing; *arīn* — the enemies; *api* — although; *asaṁyattān* — without any endeavor to fight; *jāta*-*kṣobhān* — who became agitated; *sva*-*nāyakān* — his own captains and commanders; *nyaṣedhat* — prevented; *daitya*-*rāṭ* — the Emperor of the Daityas, Mahārāja Bali; *ślokyaḥ* — very respectable and prominent; *sandhi* — for making negotiations; *vigraha* — as well as for fighting; *kāla* — the time; *vit* — completely aware of.

### Translation

**Mahārāja Bali, a most celebrated king of the demons, knew very well when to make peace and when to fight. Thus although his commanders and captains were agitated and were about to kill the demigods, Mahārāja Bali, seeing that the demigods were coming to him without a militant attitude, forbade his commanders to kill them.**

### Purport

Vedic etiquette enjoins: *gṛhe śatrum api prāptaṁ viśvastam akutobhayam.* When enemies come to their opponent’s place, they should be received in such a way that they will forget that there is animosity between the two parties. Bali Mahārāja was well conversant with the arts of peacemaking and fighting. Thus he received the demigods very well, although his commanders and captains were agitated. This kind of treatment was prevalent even during the fight between the Pāṇḍavas and the Kurus. During the day, the Pāṇḍavas and Kurus would fight with the utmost strength, and when the day was over they would go to each other’s camps as friends and be received as such. During such friendly meetings, one enemy would offer anything the other enemy wanted. That was the system.

## Text 29

### Devanagari

ते वैरोचनिमासीनं गुप्तं चासुरयूथपै- ।  
श्रिया परमया जुष्टं जिताशेषमुपागमन् ॥ २९ ॥

### Verse text

*te vairocanim āsīnaṁ  
guptaṁ cāsura-yūtha-paiḥ  
śriyā paramayā juṣṭaṁ  
jitāśeṣam upāgaman*

### Synonyms

*te* — all the demigods; *vairocanim* — unto Balirāja, the son of Virocana; *āsīnam* — sitting down; *guptam* — well protected; *ca* — and; *asura*-*yūtha*-*paiḥ* — by the commanders of the *asuras*; *śriyā* — by opulence; *paramayā* — supreme; *juṣṭam* — blessed; *jita*-*aśeṣam* — who became the proprietor of all the worlds; *upāgaman* — approached.

### Translation

**The demigods approached Bali Mahārāja, the son of Virocana, and sat down near him. Bali Mahārāja was protected by the commanders of the demons and was most opulent, having conquered the entire universe.**

## Text 30

### Devanagari

महेन्द्र- श्लक्ष्णया वाचा सान्‍त्वयित्वा महामति- ।  
अभ्यभाषत तत् सर्वं शिक्षितं पुरुषोत्तमात् ॥ ३० ॥

### Verse text

*mahendraḥ ślakṣṇayā vācā  
sāntvayitvā mahā-matiḥ  
abhyabhāṣata tat sarvaṁ  
śikṣitaṁ puruṣottamāt*

### Synonyms

*mahā*-*indraḥ* — the King of heaven, Indra; *ślakṣṇayā* — very mild; *vācā* — by words; *sāntvayitvā* — pleasing Bali Mahārāja very much; *mahā*-*matiḥ* — the most intelligent person; *abhyabhāṣata* — addressed; *tat* — that; *sarvam* — everything; *śikṣitam* — that was learned; *puruṣa*-*uttamāt* — from Lord Viṣṇu.

### Translation

**After pleasing Bali Mahārāja with mild words, Lord Indra, the King of the demigods, who was most intelligent, very politely submitted all the proposals he had learned from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu.**

## Text 31

### Devanagari

तत्त्वरोचत दैत्यस्य तत्रान्ये येऽसुराधिपा- ।  
शम्बरोऽरिष्टनेमिश्च ये च त्रिपुरवासिन- ॥ ३१ ॥

### Verse text

*tat tv arocata daityasya  
tatrānye ye ’surādhipāḥ  
śambaro ’riṣṭanemiś ca  
ye ca tripura-vāsinaḥ*

### Synonyms

*tat* — all those words; *tu* — but; *arocata* — were very pleasing; *daityasya* — to Bali Mahārāja; *tatra* — as well as; *anye* — others; *ye* — who were; *asura*-*adhipāḥ* — the chiefs of the *asuras*; *śambaraḥ* — Śambara; *ariṣṭanemiḥ* — Ariṣṭanemi; *ca* — also; *ye* — others who; *ca* — and; *tripura*-*vāsinaḥ* — all the residents of Tripura.

### Translation

**The proposals submitted by King Indra were immediately accepted by Bali Mahārāja and his assistants, headed by Śambara and Ariṣṭanemi, and by all the other residents of Tripura.**

### Purport

It appears from this verse that politics, diplomacy, the propensity to cheat, and everything that we find in this world in individual and social negotiations between two parties are also present in the upper planetary systems. The demigods went to Bali Mahārāja with the proposal to manufacture nectar, and the Daityas, the demons, immediately accepted it, thinking that since the demigods were already weak, when the nectar was produced the demons would take it from them and use it for their own purposes. The demigods, of course, had similar intentions. The only difference is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, was on the side of the demigods because the demigods were His devotees, whereas the demons did not care about Lord Viṣṇu. All over the universe there are two parties — the Viṣṇu party, or God-conscious party, and the godless party. The godless party is never happy or victorious, but the God-conscious party is always happy and victorious.

## Text 32

### Devanagari

ततो देवासुरा- कृत्वा संविदं कृतसौहृदा- ।  
उद्यमं परमं चक्रुरमृतार्थे परन्तप ॥ ३२ ॥

### Verse text

*tato devāsurāḥ kṛtvā  
saṁvidaṁ kṛta-sauhṛdāḥ  
udyamaṁ paramaṁ cakrur  
amṛtārthe parantapa*

### Synonyms

*tataḥ* — thereafter; *deva*-*asurāḥ* — both the demons and the demigods; *kṛtvā* — executing; *saṁvidam* — indicating; *kṛta*-*sauhṛdāḥ* — an armistice between them; *udyamam* — enterprise; *paramam* — supreme; *cakruḥ* — they did; *amṛta*-*arthe* — for the sake of nectar; *parantapa* — O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, chastiser of enemies.

### Translation

**O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, chastiser of enemies, the demigods and the demons thereafter made an armistice between them. Then, with great enterprise, they arranged to produce nectar, as proposed by Lord Indra.**

### Purport

The word *saṁvidam* is significant in this verse. The demigods and demons both agreed to stop fighting, at least for the time being, and endeavored to produce nectar. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura notes in this connection:

*saṁvid yuddhe pratijñāyām  
ācāre nāmni toṣaṇe  
sambhāṣaṇe kriyākāre  
saṅketa-jñānayor api*

The word *saṁvit* is variously used to mean “in fighting,” “in promising,” “for satisfying,” “in addressing,” “by practical action,” “indication,” and “knowledge.”

## Text 33

### Devanagari

ततस्ते मन्दरगिरिमोजसोत्पाट्य दुर्मदा- ।  
नदन्त उदधिं निन्यु- शक्ता- परिघबाहव- ॥ ३३ ॥

### Verse text

*tatas te mandara-girim  
ojasotpāṭya durmadāḥ  
nadanta udadhiṁ ninyuḥ  
śaktāḥ parigha-bāhavaḥ*

### Synonyms

*tataḥ* — thereafter; *te* — all the demigods and demons; *mandara*-*girim* — Mandara Mountain; *ojasā* — with great strength; *utpāṭya* — extracting; *durmadāḥ* — very powerful and competent; *nadanta* — cried very loudly; *udadhim* — toward the ocean; *ninyuḥ* — brought; *śaktāḥ* — very strong; *parigha*-*bāhavaḥ* — having long, strong arms.

### Translation

**Thereafter, with great strength, the demons and demigods, who were all very powerful and who had long, stout arms, uprooted Mandara Mountain. Crying very loudly, they brought it toward the Ocean of Milk.**

## Text 34

### Devanagari

दूरभारोद्वहश्रान्ता- शक्रवैरोचनादय- ।  
अपारयन्तस्तं वोढुं विवशा विजहु- पथि ॥ ३४ ॥

### Verse text

*dūra-bhārodvaha-śrāntāḥ  
śakra-vairocanādayaḥ  
apārayantas taṁ voḍhuṁ  
vivaśā vijahuḥ pathi*

### Synonyms

*dūra* — for a great distance; *bhāra*-*udvaha* — by carrying the great load; *śrāntāḥ* — being fatigued; *śakra* — King Indra; *vairocana*-*ādayaḥ* — and Mahārāja Bali (the son of Virocana) and others; *apārayantaḥ* — being unable; *tam* — the mountain; *voḍhum* — to bear; *vivaśāḥ* — being unable; *vijahuḥ* — gave up; *pathi* — on the way.

### Translation

**Because of conveying the great mountain for a long distance, King Indra, Mahārāja Bali and the other demigods and demons became fatigued. Being unable to carry the mountain, they left it on the way.**

## Text 35

### Devanagari

निपतन्स गिरिस्तत्र बहूनमरदानवान् ।  
चूर्णयामास महता भारेण कनकाचल- ॥ ३५ ॥

### Verse text

*nipatan sa giris tatra  
bahūn amara-dānavān  
cūrṇayām āsa mahatā  
bhāreṇa kanakācalaḥ*

### Synonyms

*nipatan* — falling down; *saḥ* — that; *giriḥ* — mountain; *tatra* — there; *bahūn* — many; *amara*-*dānavān* — demigods and demons; *cūrṇayām* *āsa* — were smashed; *mahatā* — by great; *bhāreṇa* — weight; *kanaka*-*acalaḥ* — the golden mountain known as Mandara.

### Translation

**The mountain known as Mandara, which was extremely heavy, being made of gold, fell and smashed many demigods and demons.**

### Purport

By constitution, gold is heavier than stone. Since Mandara Mountain was made of gold and was therefore heavier than stone, the demigods and demons could not properly carry it to the Ocean of Milk.

## Text 36

### Devanagari

तांस्तथा भग्नमनसो भग्नबाहूरुकन्धरान् ।  
विज्ञाय भगवांस्तत्र बभूव गरुडध्वज- ॥ ३६ ॥

### Verse text

*tāṁs tathā bhagna-manaso  
bhagna-bāhūru-kandharān  
vijñāya bhagavāṁs tatra  
babhūva garuḍa-dhvajaḥ*

### Synonyms

*tān* — all the demigods and demons; *tathā* — thereafter; *bhagna*-*manasaḥ* — being brokenhearted; *bhagna*-*bāhu* — with broken arms; *ūru* — thighs; *kandharān* — and shoulders; *vijñāya* — knowing; *bhagavān* — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; *tatra* — there; *babhūva* — appeared; *garuḍa*-*dhvajaḥ* — being carried on Garuḍa.

### Translation

**The demigods and demons were frustrated and disheartened, and their arms, thighs and shoulders were broken. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who knows everything, appeared there on the back of His carrier, Garuḍa.**

## Text 37

### Devanagari

गिरिपातविनिष्पिष्टान्विलोक्यामरदानवान् ।  
ईक्षया जीवयामास निर्जरान् निर्व्रणान् यथा ॥ ३७ ॥

### Verse text

*giri-pāta-viniṣpiṣṭān  
vilokyāmara-dānavān  
īkṣayā jīvayām āsa  
nirjarān nirvraṇān yathā*

### Synonyms

*giri*-*pāta* — because of the falling of Mandara Mountain; *viniṣpiṣṭān* — crushed; *vilokya* — observing; *amara* — the demigods; *dānavān* — and the demons; *īkṣayā* — simply by His glance; *jīvayām* *āsa* — brought back to life; *nirjarān* — without aggrievement; *nirvraṇān* — without bruises; *yathā* — as.

### Translation

**Observing that most of the demons and the demigods had been crushed by the falling of the mountain, the Lord glanced over them and brought them back to life. Thus they became free from grief, and they even had no bruises on their bodies.**

## Text 38

### Devanagari

गिरिं चारोप्य गरुडे हस्तेनैकेन लीलया ।  
आरुह्य प्रययावब्धिं सुरासुरगणैर्वृत- ॥ ३८ ॥

### Verse text

*giriṁ cāropya garuḍe  
hastenaikena līlayā  
āruhya prayayāv abdhiṁ  
surāsura-gaṇair vṛtaḥ*

### Synonyms

*girim* — the mountain; *ca* — also; *āropya* — placing; *garuḍe* — on the back of Garuḍa; *hastena* — by the hand; *ekena* — one; *līlayā* — very easily as His pastime; *āruhya* — getting on; *prayayau* — He went; *abdhim* — to the Ocean of Milk; *sura*-*asura*-*gaṇaiḥ* — by the demigods and *asuras*; *vṛtaḥ* — surrounded.

### Translation

**The Lord very easily lifted the mountain with one hand and placed it on the back of Garuḍa. Then, He too got on the back of Garuḍa and went to the Ocean of Milk, surrounded by the demigods and demons.**

### Purport

Here is proof of the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is above everyone. There are two classes of living entities — the demons and the demigods — and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is above them both. The demons believe in the “chance” theory of creation, whereas the demigods believe in creation by the hand of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The omnipotence of the Supreme Lord is proved here, for simply with one hand He lifted Mandara Mountain, the demigods and the demons, placed them on the back of Garuḍa and brought them to the Ocean of Milk. Now, the demigods, the devotees, would immediately accept this incident, knowing that the Lord can lift anything, however heavy it might be. But although demons were also carried along with the demigods, demons, upon hearing of this incident, would say that it is mythological. But if God is all-powerful, why would it be difficult for Him to lift a mountain? Since He is floating innumerable planets with many hundreds and thousands of Mandara Mountains, why can’t He lift one of them with His hand? This is not mythology, but the difference between the believers and the faithless is that the devotees accept the incidents mentioned in the Vedic literatures to be true, whereas the demons simply argue and label all these historical incidents mythology. Demons would prefer to explain that everything happening in the cosmic manifestation takes place by chance, but demigods, or devotees, never consider anything to be chance. Rather, they know that everything is an arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the difference between the demigods and the demons.

## Text 39

### Devanagari

अवरोप्य गिरिं स्कन्धात् सुपर्ण- पततां वर- ।  
ययौ जलान्त उत्सृज्य हरिणा स विसर्जित- ॥ ३९ ॥

### Verse text

*avaropya giriṁ skandhāt  
suparṇaḥ patatāṁ varaḥ  
yayau jalānta utsṛjya  
hariṇā sa visarjitaḥ*

### Synonyms

*avaropya* — unloading; *girim* — the mountain; *skandhāt* — from his shoulder; *suparṇaḥ* — Garuḍa; *patatām* — of all the birds; *varaḥ* — the biggest or most powerful; *yayau* — went; *jala*-*ante* — where the water is; *utsṛjya* — placing; *hariṇā* — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; *saḥ* — he (Garuḍa); *visarjitaḥ* — discharged from that place.

### Translation

**Thereafter, Garuḍa, the chief of birds, unloaded Mandara Mountain from his shoulder and brought it near the water. Then he was asked by the Lord to leave that place, and he left.**

### Purport

Garuḍa was asked by the Lord to leave that place because the snake Vāsuki, who was to be used as the rope for churning, could not go there in the presence of Garuḍa. Garuḍa, the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu, is not a vegetarian. He eats big snakes. Vāsuki, being a great snake, would be natural food for Garuḍa, the chief of birds. Lord Viṣṇu therefore asked Garuḍa to leave so that Vāsuki could be brought to churn the ocean with Mandara Mountain, which was to be used as the churning rod. These are the wonderful arrangements of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nothing takes place by accident. Carrying Mandara Mountain on the back of a bird and putting it in its right position might be difficult for anyone, whether demigod or demon, but for the Supreme Personality of Godhead everything is possible, as shown by this pastime. The Lord had no difficulty lifting the mountain with one hand, and Garuḍa, His carrier, carried all the demons and demigods together by the grace of the Supreme Lord. The Lord is known as Yogeśvara, the master of all mystic power, because of His omnipotence. If He likes, He can make anything lighter than cotton or heavier than the universe. Those who do not believe in the activities of the Lord cannot explain how things happen. Using words like “accident,” they take shelter of ideas that are unbelievable. Nothing is accidental. Everything is done by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as the Lord Himself confirms in *Bhagavad-gītā* (9.10). *Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sacarācaram.* Whatever actions and reactions occur within the cosmic manifestation all take place under the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. However, because the demons do not understand the potency of the Lord, when wonderful things are done, the demons think that they are accidental.

*Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the* Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, *entitled “The Demigods and Demons Declare a Truce.”*
